

Published in 2020 by Illuminate Publishing Limited, an imprint of Hodder Education, an Hachette UK Company, Carmelite House, 50 Victoria Embankment, London EC4Y 0DZ 
Orders: Please visit www.illuminatepublishing.com or email sales@illuminatepublishing.com 
© Cara Flanagan, Matt Jarvis, Rob Liddle 
The moral rights of the authors have been asserted. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers. 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
ISBN 978-1-912820-42-9 
Printed by: DZS Grafik, Bosnia & Herzegovina 
The publisher’s policy is to use papers that are natural, renewable and recyclable products made from wood grown in sustainable forests. The logging and manufacturing processes are expected to conform to the environmental regulations of the country of origin. 
Every effort has been made to contact copyright holders of material produced in this book. If notifed, the publisher will be pleased to rectify any errors or omissions at the earliest opportunity. 
Editor: Nic Watson Design: Nigel Harriss Layout: Sarah Clifford (Kamae Design) 
The Year 1 course: A level and AS 
Co-teachability 
Students doing the AS or Year 1 of the A level cover exactly the same topics during their course of study. A level students have a few additional topics for Paper 2 (see bottom of this page). This means that the AS and Year 1 of the A level are co-teachable. 
In the A level exams questions are worth a maximum of 16 marks and AS questions a maximum of 12 marks (see page 213 for more on this). 
If you are an A level student, you can take the AS exam at the end of your first year but this will not count towards your A level. A level students must take all three A level papers at the end of their final year of study. 
• There are two papers.
AS level 
• 
Each paper is 1½ hours and 72 marks in total. 

• 
Each paper is worth 50% of the final AS level mark. 


Paper 1 Introductory Topics in Psychology 
Each section is worth 24 marks. All questions are compulsory. 
Section A: Social influence Section B: Memory Section C: Attachment 
Paper 2 Psychology in Context 
Each section is worth 24 marks. All questions are compulsory. 
Section A: Approaches in Psychology Section B: Psychopathology Section C: Research methods 
Research methods 
About 25% of the overall assessment will assess skills in relation to research methods. A minimum of 10% of the overall assessment will assess mathematical skills (see page 217) for both AS and A level. 
Approval message from AQA 
This textbook has been approved by AQA for use with our qualification. This means that we have checked that it broadly covers the specification and we are satisfied with the overall quality. Full details of our approval process can be found on our website. 
We approve textbooks because we know how important it is for teachers and students to have the right resources to support their teaching and learning. However, the publisher is ultimately responsible for the editorial control and quality of this book. 
Please note that when teaching the Psychology AS and A-Level course (7181; 7182), you must refer to AQA’s specification as your definitive source of information. While this book has been written to match the specification, it does not provide complete coverage of every aspect of the course. 
A wide range of other useful resources can be found on the relevant subject pages of our website: www.aqa.org.uk. 
Paper 2: Extra topics for A level (covered in our Year 2 book) 
If you are doing A level rather than AS, then you will need to study Paper 3 topics plus the following additional topics for Paper 2: 
Approaches: The psychodynamic and humanistic approaches, plus a comparison of all approaches. 
Biopsychology: Localisation of function in the brain, ways of studying the brain, biological rhythms. 
Research methods: Content analysis, case studies, reliability, validity, features of science, reporting psychological investigations, levels of measurement, probability and significance, choosing inferential tests.
2 // 
Contents 
How to use this book 
4 

The chapters 

Appendix: A Level and AS skills 213 
References  224 
Index with glossary 
228 
 Contents // 3 
How to use this book 
Psychology assessment consists of three skills: describing what you know, What is an ‘assessment objective’ (AO)? applying your knowledge and analysing/evaluating this knowledge. This 
It is something that is used to assess your ability. 
applies to all students – AS students and A level students. 
You can demonstrate what you know by describing it (AO1) but there is more to knowledge than that. There is the further 
On pages 213–223 we look at the skills needed for AS/A level Psychology, 
skill of being able to use your knowledge in new situations which will help you see why we have designed our spreads as they are. (applying  your knowledge, AO2). And a further skill is to be 
able to judge the value of your knowledge (evaluation, AO3). 
All three of these skills are what you are examined on. 

Describing what you know  Applying your knowledge  Analysing and evaluating  
Assessment objective 1 (AO1)  Assessment objective 2 (AO2)  Assessment objective 3 (AO3)  P – Identify the POINT  
is concerned with your ability  is concerned with being able  is concerned with your ability to evaluate the theories,  to be made.  
to report detailed descriptions of psychological knowledge and demonstrate your understanding of this knowledge. We have presented all the AO1 material on the left -hand side of each spread. We have divided the text up with subheadings to help you organise your understanding. Each heading should act as a cue for material to recall and matches the material in the summary at the end of each chapter.  to apply your psychological knowledge. It is a really good way to assess whether you do understand the psychological knowledge. On every spread we usually have two or three ‘Apply it’ questions which give you a chance to practise this AO2 skill of application in relation to both concepts and research methods. Research methods topics are covered in Chapter 6 but we have given you a chance to apply this knowledge throughout the book.  concepts and studies you have learned about. We have presented the AO3 material on the right-hand side of each spread. Generally we have provided: • Two or three evaluation points. Each of these is divided into three paragraphs to help you understand how to structure evaluation using PET.   • One counterpoint – to help you develop the skill of discussion. Extended writing questions may say ‘Discuss’ which means you should present your evaluation points as a two-sided discussion (point and counterpoint). • One evaluation extra – for those who want a bit more evaluation we off er a debate to consider. It is always preferable to include fewer points but  E – ELABORATE the point. Which can be done with an EXAMPLE, or some EVIDENCE from a research study or an EXPLANATION. T – End with a link back to the essay title and/or give a conclusion: ‘THIS suggests ...’ ‘THEREFORE ...’ ‘THIS means ...’.  
really elaborate the ones you do, rather than trying  
to cover many poorly explained points. So this  
really is an ‘extra’.  

Conformity 
Evaluation 
The specification says… 

Asch’s research Artif cial situation and task 
Variables affecting conformity including group size, unanimity and task difficulty as investigated by Asch. 
One limitation of Asch’s research is that the task and situation were 
Asch’s baseline procedure 

artiÿ cial. Solomon Asch’s research has had a considerable impact on Solomon Asch (1951) devised a procedure to assess to what extent people will Participants knew they were in a research study and may simply our understanding of conformity. We often ‘go along’ with conform to the opinion of others, even in a situation where the answer is certain have gone along with what was expected (demand characteristics). other people in our everyday social lives. We agree with their (i.e. unambiguous). The procedure of his original study is brieŠ y described below The task of identifying lines was relatively trivial and therefore there opinions and change our behaviour to ‘f t in’ with theirs. In leŒ  – this is called the ‘baseline’ study because it is the one against which all the was really no reason not to conform. Also, according to Susan Fiske other words we conform. Asch wanted to f nd out why. later studies are compared. (2014), ‘Asch’s groups were not very groupy’, i.e. they did not really 
Note that the speciÿ cation focuses on the ÿ ndings and conclusions from resemble groups that we experience in everyday life. Key terms Asch’s later research. Therefore we have not described the baseline procedure and This means the ÿ ndings do not generalise to real-world ÿ ndings in the main text. situations, especially those where the consequences of conformity 
Conformity‘A change in a person’s behaviour or opinions as 
might be important. 

a result of real or imagined pressure from a person or group of Variables investigated by Asch people.’ (Aronson 2011) Limited application
Asch (1955) extended his baseline study to investigate the variables that might Conformity is usually assumed to be a bad thing. But sometimes Group sizeAsch increased the size of the group by adding lead to an increase or a decrease in conformity. Another limitation is that Asch’s participants were American men. situations demand that everybody pulls in the same direction. 
more confederates, thus increasing the size of the majority. 1. Group size  Asch wanted to know whether the size of the group would be more Other research suggests that women may be more conformist, 
Conformity increased with group size, but only up to a point, possibly because they are concerned about social relationships and 
important than the agreement of the group. To test this he varied the number of 
levelling o•  when the majority was greater than three. being accepted (Neto 1995). Furthermore, the US is an individualist 
confederates from one to 15 (so the total group size was from two to 16). 
culture (i.e. where people are more concerned about themselves Asch found a curvilinear relationship between group size and conformity rate 

UnanimityThe extent to which all the members of a group 
rather than their social group). Similar conformity studies conducted 

agree. In Asch’s studies, the majority was unanimous when (see Apply it on facing page for graph). Conformity increased with group size, Group size 
in collectivist cultures (such as China where the social group is more all the confederates selected the same comparison line. This but only up to a point. With three confederates, conformity to the wrong answer important than the individual) have found that conformity rates Graph showing variation of Asch’s baseline study: Group size. 

produced the greatest degree of conformity in the naïve rose to 31.8%. But the presence of more confederates made little dif erence – the are higher (Bond and Smith 1996, see page 123 for a discussion of 
participants. conformity rate soon levelled of . 
individualist/collectivist). 40
This suggests that most people are very sensitive to the views of others 

Task di	  cultyAsch’s line-judging task is more di/  cult when This means that Asch’s ÿ ndings tell us little about conformity in it becomes harder to work out the correct answer. Conformity women and people from some cultures. 
because just one or two confederates was enough to sway opinion. 35 
% Conformity rates 
30
2. Unanimity  Asch wondered if the presence of a non-conforming person 
increased because naïve participants assume that the majority 
is more likely to be right. 

would af ect the naïve participant’s conformity. He introduced a confederate who Research support 
easy’ and ‘hard’ maths problems. Participants were given answers from 
25 
20 
15 
10 

disagreed with the other confederates. In one variation of the study this person 
One strength of Asch’s research is support from other studies for the 

gave the correct answer and in another variation he gave a (dif erent) wrong one. ef ects of task diÿ  culty. The genuine participant conformed less oŒ en in the presence of a dissenter. For example, Todd Lucas et al. (2006) asked their participants to solve 
Asch’s baseline procedure 

The rate decreased to less than a quarter of the level it was when the majority 
‘ 
Standard and comparison lines 
123 American men were tested, each one in a group with other apparent participants. Each participant saw two large white cards on each trial. The line X on the leŒ -hand card is the standard line. The lines A, B and C are the three comparison lines. One of X ABC the comparison lines is always clearly the same length as X, the other two are substantially dif erent 
(i.e. clearly wrong). On each trial the participants had to say (out loud) which of the comparison lines was the same length as the standard line X. 
Physical arrangement of the participants in the study 3rd 4th 5th 
The participants were tested in groups of 6 to 8. Only one was 
2nd 6th
a genuine (naïve) participant, always seated either last or (as here) next to last in the group. The others were all 
1st 7th 
confederates of Asch – that is, they all gave the same (incorrect) scripted answers each time. The genuine participant did not know the others were ‘fake’ participants. 
Baseline ÿ ndings 
On average, the genuine participants agreed with confederates’ incorrect 
answers 36.8% of the time (i.e. they conformed about a third of the time). There were individual dif erences, 25% of the participants never gave a wrong answer (i.e. never conformed). 

was unanimous. The presence of a dissenter appeared to free the naïve participant to behave more independently. This was true even when the dissenter disagreed with the genuine participant. 
This suggests that the inŠ uence of the majority depends to a large extent on it being unanimous. And that non-conformity is more likely when cracks are perceived in the majority’s unanimous view. 
3. Task diÿ  culty  Asch wanted to know whether making the task harder would af ect the degree of conformity. He increased the diÿ  culty of the line-judging task by making the stimulus line and the comparison lines more similar to each other in length. This meant it became harder for the genuine participants to see the dif erences between the lines. 
Asch found that conformity increased. It may be that the situation is more ambiguous when the task becomes harder – it is unclear to the participants what the right answer is. In these circumstances, it is natural to look to other people for guidance and to assume that they are right and you are wrong (this is called informational social in uence (ISI), which is discussed on the next spread). 
The big night out 

Some students are celebrating the end of their exams by having a night out. They have been in the pub all evening and are now discussing which nightclub to go on to. Imogen prefers Rotting Flesh but the majority of the group wants to go to Scar Tissue. 
Question 

Brie˜ y explain how each of the following factors might affect whether or not Imogen conforms to the majority: (a) Group size, (b) Unanimity, 
(c) Task difÿ culty. 
three other students (not actually real). The participants conformed more oŒ en (i.e. agreed with the wrong answers) when the problems were harder. This shows Asch was correct in claiming that task diÿ  culty is one variable that af ects conformity. 
Counterpoint However, Lucas et al.’s study found that conformity is more complex than Asch suggested. Participants with high conÿ dence in their maths abilities conformed less on hard tasks than those with low conÿ dence. 
This shows that an individual-level factor can inŠ uence conformity by interacting with situational variables (e.g. task diÿ  culty). But Asch did not research the roles of individual factors. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Ethical issues 
Asch’s research increased our knowledge of why people conform, which may help avoid mindless destructive conformity. 
The naïve participants were deceived because they thought the other people involved in the procedure (the confederates) were also genuine participants like themselves. However, it is worth bearing in mind that this ethical cost should be weighed up against the beneÿ ts gained from the study. 
Consider: On balance do you think the beneÿ ts outweighed the costs? 
Study tip 
Ethical evaluations are only relevant when considering a study. Such issues do not challenge the validity of the f ndings. 
5 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9101112131415 Size of majority (number of confederates) 
Questions 
1. 
The results from Asch’s research on the effects of group size are shown above. What was the approximate conformity rate when there was one confederate? (1 mark) 

2. 
What was the rate when there were three confederates? (1˜mark) 

3. 
What was the rate when there were nine confederates? (1 mark) 

4. 
Asch used a volunteer sampling method to recruit his participants. Explain one strength and one limitation of this sampling method. (4˜marks) 

5. 
When the total group size was four there would be only one naïve participant and the others were confederates. Express the number of confederates as a fraction and a percentage of the total group size. (2˜marks) 


Check it 
1. 
One variable that affects conformity is ‘unanimity’. Explain what is meant by ‘unanimity’.  [2 marks] 

2. 
Apart from unanimity, identify and brie˜ y outline two variables that affect conformity.  [6 marks] 

3. 
Outline the procedure and ÿ ndings of one study into conformity conducted by Asch.  [6 marks] 

4. 
Describe and evaluate Asch’s research into conformity. [12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 



16 //  Chapter 1 Social influence Conformity  // 17 
4 //  Introduction 

Extra features on each spread 





















The specification says 
The spread begins (top left) with an excerpt from the specification showing what is covered on the spread. There is also a brief analysis of what the specification entry means. 
Key terms 
The specification terms are explained, mirroring what you might be expected to know if you were asked to explain the terms. These key terms are emboldened in blue in the text. 
Other important words are emboldened in the text and explained in the glossary, which forms part of the index. 
Study tips 
This book has been written by very experienced teachers and subject experts. When there is room they give you some of their top tips about the skills necessary to demonstrate your understanding of psychology. The study tips may also include pointers about typical misunderstandings. 

Check it 
A sample of practice questions to help you focus on how you will be using the material on the spread. 
The final question is an extended writing question. AS students should aim to answer a 12-mark version whereas A level students will need to practise a 16-mark version. Extended writing skills are discussed on pages 220–221. 
Student digital book (SDB) 


















A digital version of this student book is also available if your school has 
access to our Digital Book Bundle of student and teacher resources. You 
can view this digital version via a tablet or computer at school, home or on 
the bus – wherever it suits you. 
There are extra features in the student digital book that support your 
studies. For every spread in this book there are: 
• 
Lifelines: Very straightforward, easy-to-digest key descriptive points for the spread topic. 

• 
Extensions: Extra information, studies or activities to challenge and stretch you further. 

• 
Weblinks to useful YouTube videos or other sites. 

• 
Answers to the Apply it and Evaluation extra questions in this book (invaluable!). 

• 
Quizzes: Interactive, self-marking quizzes that help to check and reinforce your understanding of a topic. 

• 
Practice questions: Extra questions to help you practise your skills. 


Need a lifeline? 
The SDB is your answer. 

Extra features in each chapter 
























Chapter introduction 
Each chapter begins with discussion points that might help you start thinking about the topic. 

Practical corner 
Questions on research methods account for about 25% of the assessment, therefore you should devote a lot of time to understanding how psychologists conduct research. There is no better way to do this than being a researcher yourself. We offer some ideas for research activities and provide additional opportunities to practise mathematical skills. 
Chapter summary 
Each chapter ends with a useful spread summarising the key points from each  main content spread. 
These summaries should help you revise. Look at each key point and see what you can remember. Look back at the spread to remind yourself. Each time you do this you should remember more. 
Revision summaries 
Obedience Conformity 
Situational variables Situational explanations Dispositional explanation 
Were Germans different? Pressures in the situation. The dynamics of social hierarchies. Personality factors in the individual. 
Conformity Types and explanations Conformity to social roles 
Milgram’s research Research Agentic state The Authoritarian 
Judging the lengths of lines. Conformity is yielding to group pressures. Behaviour related to social roles and norms. 
Baseline procedure Proximity Agentic state Personality (AP) Asch’s research Types Zimbardo’s research 
American male participants gave Obedience 40% with T and L Acting as an agent of another person. fake electric shocks to a ‘Learner’ in same room, 30% for touch 
AP and obedience 
Adorno et al. described AP as extreme 
Autonomous state Baseline procedure Internalisation The Stanford prison experiment (SPE) in response to instructions (prods) proximity. 
respect for authority and submissiveness Free to act according to conscience. 
from an ‘Experimenter’.
123 male participants judged line lengths. Confederates Private and public acceptance of group norms. Mock prison with 21 student volunteers, randomly assigned as Psychological distance a‰ects to it, contempt for inferiors. 
obedience. Switching between the two – agentic shiƒ. 
deliberately gave wrong answers. guards or prisoners. 
Baseline ÿndings Identiÿcation Origins of AP 
Conformity to social roles created through uniforms (e.g. 
65% gave highest shock of 450 V. Location Binding factors Findings Change behaviour to be part of a group we identify with, Harsh parenting creates hostility that loose smocks, carrying wooden club) and instructions about 100% gave shocks up to 300 V. Obedience 47.5% in run-down oÿce Allow individual to ignore the damaging e‰ects of their obedient Naïve participants conformed on 36.8% of trials. may change privately too. 
cannot be expressed against parents so behaviour (e.g. guards have power). 
building. behaviour, reducing moral strain. 
25% never conformed. 
Many showed signs of anxiety e.g. 
is displaced onto scapegoats. 
Compliance 
Findings related to social roles sweating. University’s prestige gave authority. 
Variations Go along with group publicly but no private change. 
Adorno et al.’s research: Procedure Group size and prisoners became depressed. Uniform Used F-scale to study unconscious Asch varied group size from two to 16. Conformity increased Explanations Study stopped aƒer 6 days. Obedience 20% when Experimenter Research support attitudes towards other racial groups. 
Guards became increasingly brutal, prisoners’ rebellion put down 
Evaluation 
Evaluation 
up to three, then levelled o‰. 
was ‘member of the public’. Milgram’s resistant participants continued giving shocks when 
Research support Findings Unanimity Informational social in„uence (ISI) Conclusions related to social roles 
Uniform is symbol of legitimate Experimenter took responsibility. 
French TV documentary/game APs identify with ‘strong’ people, Asch placed a dissenter (confederate) in the group. Conform to be right. Assume group knows better than us. Participants strongly conformed to their social roles. 
authority. 
show found 80% gave maximum A limited explanation have  ÿxed cognitive style, and hold 
Conformity rate reduced. shock, plus similar behaviour to 
Normative social in„uence (NSI) 
Cannot explain why Rank and Jacobson’s nurses and some of stereotypes and prejudices. 
Task diÿculty Evaluation Milgram’s participants (Beauvois Evaluation Milgram’s participants disobeyed. 
Conform to be liked or accepted by group. 
Asch made line lengths more similar. Conformity increased et al.). 
when task was harder (ISI). Control 
Research support Evaluation extra: Obedience alibi revisited Evaluation Low internal validity 
Random assignment to roles increased internal validity. 
Evaluation 
Bickman showed power of uniform Police Battalion 101 behaved autonomously but destructively Participants realised shocks were in ÿeld experiment. (Mandel). Research support Evaluation Lack of realism fake, so ‘play-acting’ (Orne and 
Research support for NSI 
Obedient participants had high F-scores 
When no normative group pressure (wrote answers), Participants play-acted their roles according to media-derived Holland). Supported by Perry – Cross-cultural replications (Elms and Milgram). 
Artiÿcial situation and task 
conformity down to 12.5% (Asch). stereotypes (Banuazizi and Movahedi). tapes of participants showed only Dutch participants ordered to say Legitimacy of authority 
Counterpoint – but obedientParticipants knew this was a study so they just played along 
Counterpoint – evidence that prisoners thought the prison 50% believed shocks real. stressful things to interviewee, 
Legitimacy of authority participants also unlike authoritarians in with a trivial task (demand characteristics). 
Research support for ISI 
decreased proximity led to decreased 
was real to them e.g. 90% of conversations about prison Counterpoint – participant did 
many ways, complex. 
Created by hierarchical nature of society. 
Participants relied on other people’s answers to hard (McDermott). give real shocks to a puppy obedience (Meeus and Raaijmakers). 
Limited application 
Some people entitled to expect obedience. 
maths problems (Lucas et al.). Counterpoint – cannot usually separate ISI and NSI, a 
(Sheridan and King). Counterpoint – but most studies in Limited explanation Asch’s research only conducted on American men. 
Exaggerates the power of roles 
Western cultures, similar to USA, so Learned in childhood. Can’t explain obedience across a whole 
Research support dissenter may reduce power of NSI or ISI. Only one-third of guards were brutal so conclusions Alternative interpretation of not generalisable (Smith and Bond). culture (social identity theory is better). 
Destructive authority 
exaggerated (Fromm). ÿndings Lucas et al. found more conformity when maths problems 
Individual dišerences in NSI Haslam et al. found participants Low internal validity Problems arise when used destructively (e.g. Hitler). Political bias were harder. 
Evaluation extra: Alternative explanation 
nAÿliators want to be liked more, so conform more didn’t obey Prod 4. Participants Some of Milgram’s procedures in the Authoritarianism equated with Counterpoint – conformity more complex, conÿdent (McGhee and Teevan). Social identity theory suggests taking on roles due to active identiÿed with scientiÿc aims variations were especially contrived, right-wing ideology, ignores leƒ-wing participants were less conforming (individual factor). 
Evaluation 
identiÿcation, not automatic (Haslam and Reicher). (social identity) – not blind so not genuine obedience (Orne and authoritarianism (Christie and Jahoda). 
Evaluation extra: Is the NSI/ISI distinction useful? obedience. 
Holland).
Evaluation extra: Ethical issues Explains cultural dišerences 
NSI/ISI distinction may not be useful but Asch’s research 
Evaluation extra: Flawed evidence 




Practice questions, answers and feedback 
Learning how to produce effective question answers is a SKILL. On this spread in each chapter we look at some typical student answers to practice questions. The comments provided indicate what is good and bad in each answer. 
Multiple-choice questions (MCQs) 
Here’s a chance to test your new-found knowledge. Questions are given for each main content spread in the chapter, with answers at the bottom right of the multiple-choice questions spread. Keep trying until you get 100%. 
Multiple-choice questions 
Conformity 4. Which of the following statements best describes 4. Gina Perry claimed  of Milgram’s 3. A problem with the agentic state explanation is: 2. Social support helps people to resist social Social influence and social change 
normative social influence? participants knew the shocks were fake. influence because: 
(a) It can’t explain why the proportion of people 
1. The task in Asch’s procedure was to: 1. Once social change has occurred, its origins are 
(a) 
Going along with a group of people because we (a) A quarter. who obeyed in Milgram’s study was so high. (a) It breaks the unanimity of the majority. 

(a) 
Express political opinions. want to be liked by them. forgotten by the majority in a process called: 

(b) Half. (b) It can’t explain why some people in Milgram’s (b) It provides a model of disobedience to be 
(a) Social cryptomnesia. 

(b) 
Decide which club to go to. (b) Going along with a group of people because we (c) All. study did not obey. followed. 

(c) 
Answer questions on musical tastes. don’t know what we’re doing. (d) Two-thirds. (c) There is no research support. (c) It frees people to act according to their (b) Flexibility. 

(d) 
Judge line lengths. (c) Going along with other people even though we (d) It is not as useful as legitimacy of authority. consciences. (c) Gradual commitment. 


(d) Internalisation. 
don’t agree. Obedience: Situational variables (d) All of the above. 
2. What did Asch find about group size? 4. Legitimacy of authority is a good explanation of 
(d) 
Going along with other people because we 

(a) 
Conformity kept increasing with group size. 1. What did Milgram find out about proximity in his cultural differences in obedience because: 3. Which of these statements about locus of control 2. Conformity (majority influence) can sometimes 


accept their views. 
create social change through the operation of:
(b) 
Conformity decreased as group size increased. variations? (a) Some cultures are traditionally more respectful is the most accurate? 

(c) 
Conformity increased with group size but only Conformity to social roles (a) Obedience increased when the Experimenter of authority than others. (a) Everyone is either definitely internal or (a) Augmentation. to a point. issued his instructions over the phone. (b) Some cultures are traditionally less respectful of definitely external. (b) The snowball effect. 


1. The Stanford prison experiment investigated: 
(d)Increasing group size had no effect on (b)Obedience decreased when the Teacher and authority than others. (b)There is very little difference between moderate (c) Social proof. conformity. Learner were physically closer. (c) Cultures differ in the way parents raise children (d)Normative social influence. 
(a) 
Rebellion. internals and moderate externals. 

(b) 
Conformity to social roles. (c) Most participants obeyed even when they had to view authority figures. (c) High internals and high externals are at 


3. What did Asch find about unanimity? 3. The augmentation principle in minority influence 
(c) Obedience to authority. to put the Learner’s hand on a shock plate. (d) All of the above. opposite ends of a continuum. 
refers to:
(a) 
Conformity stayed the same whether the 


(d) 
Compliance. (d) The physical proximity of Experimenter, Teacher (d) Internals and externals are very similar in their 

majority was unanimous or not. (a) How the source of social change is eventually 
and Learner had the smallest effect. Obedience: Dispositional explanation ability to resist social influence. on conformity. (a) On a first-come, first-served basis. 2. What did Milgram find out about location in his 1. According to Adorno, people with an Authoritarian 4. High internals are more likely to resist social (b) How personal risks create a strong message. 
(b) A unanimous majority had the greatest effect 2. The roles of guard and prisoner were decided: forgotten. 
variations? Personality: influence than high externals because:
(c) When a confederate disagreed with the (b) Randomly. (c) How the minority view gradually becomes the 
majority, conformity increased. (a) Obedience decreased when the study was (a) Are highly obedient to authority. (a) They believe that whatever they do makes no majority view. 
(c) By the researchers. conformity. (b) The high status and reputation of Yale status. (b) They tend to be more self-confident and to take the majority. 
conducted in a run-down office block. real difference. 
(d) 
A divided majority had the greatest effect on (b) Look with contempt on people of inferior social (d) The deeper processing of the minority view by 

(d) 
By asking participants to volunteer. 


3. 
About  of the guards behaved brutally. University made no difference to obedience. (c) Favour traditional values. personal responsibility. 

4. 
What did Asch find about task difficulty? 4. The way in which a minority view becomes the 


(a) 
One-quarter. (c) Most participants still obeyed when the study (d) All of the above. (c) They are less likely to have an Authoritarian more difficult. (d) Changing the location had the greatest effect 2. Authoritarian Personality is measured using the: (d) They have a greater need for social approval (a) Compliance. 

(a) 
Conformity decreased when the task became was moved to a run-down office building. Personality. new norm of the majority can be explained by: 

(b) 
Two-thirds. 

(c) 
One-half. 

(b) 
Conformity increased when the task became on obedience. (a) Assertiveness scale. from others. (b) Social proof. more difficult. (b) Potential-for-fascism scale. (c) Consistency. 

(d) 
One-third. 


3. Which of Milgram’s variations produced the conformity. the prisoners? 
(c) Increasing task difficulty had no effect on 4. Which statement best describes the behaviour of (c) AP-scale. Minority influence (d) The snowball effect. 
lowest obedience? 
(a) 
Teacher forces Learner’s hand onto shock plate. (d) Potential for obedience scale. 1. Minority influence is especially effective because: participants. throughout the study. 3. 

(d) 
The task was too difficult for the naïve (a) They resisted the cruelty of the guards 


(b) Study is transferred to run-down office block. An Authoritarian Personality develops because a (a) It involves supporting strange and unusual causes. 
Conformity: Types and explanations progressed. (d) Member of public stands in for Experimenter. (a) Receives unconditional love and affection from (b) People are forced to think more deeply about 
(c) Experimenter issues instructions by telephone. child: (b) They became more submissive as the study the issues. 
parents. 
1. Which of the following is a type of conformity? (c) They made it very difficult for the guards to 
4. Bickman’s (1974) study supported Milgram (c) No one likes to think they are part of a mindless 
enforce the rules of the prison. (b) Is spoiled by his or her parents who do not use 
(a) Unanimity. because he found that: herd. 
any discipline. 
(d) 
They supported each other. 

(b) 
Internalisation. (a) Changing to a higher status location increased (d) A small group of people appears unthreatening. 


(c) Experiences feelings of hostility towards his or obedience. 
(c) Normative social influence. her parents that cannot be expressed directly. 
Obedience 2. Synchronic consistency refers to: 
(b) People more often obeyed someone dressed in 
(d) 
Obedience. (d) Is accepted regardless of his or her 

(a) 
Consistency over time. the study was about . (c) Increasing the distance between the 


1. 
Milgram’s participants were  who thought a security guard’s uniform. achievements. 

2. 
Which of the following is an explanation for (b) Consistency between people. 


conformity? (a) Volunteers, memory. participants reduced obedience. 4. People with an Authoritarian Personality are very (c) Disagreement between people. 
(a) 
Compliance. preoccupied with social status. Therefore they:

(b) 
Women, obedience. (d) Reducing the distance between authority and (d) Changing the majority view. 

(b) 
Informational social influence. participant increased obedience. (a) Treat all people with respect. 

(c) 
Children, conformity. 

3. Flexibility in the minority position is needed 

(c) 
Identification. (b) Feel sympathetic to those of lower status. 

(d) 
Germans, obedience. because: 

(d) 
Internalisation. Obedience: Situational explanations (c) Tend not to be impressed by the trappings of 


(a) Consistency alone can be a negative thing and 
2. The fourth and final prod given to the participants high status. 
1. ‘Believing you are carrying out the wishes of off-putting. 
3. Which of the following statements best describes 
was: (d) Are servile and obedient towards those of 
someone else’ is a brief description of: 
compliance? (b) It shows that the minority isn’t really all that 
(a) 
‘It is absolutely essential that you continue.’ higher status. be accepted or liked. (b) Situational theory of obedience. (c) It allows the majority to get its own way, so 

(a) 
Conforming to a majority because we want to (a) Informational social influence. bothered. 

(b) 
‘Please go on.’ 


Resistance to social influence 
(c) 
‘You have no other choice, you must go on.’ 

(b) 
Publicly and privately agreeing with the (c) Agentic state. they are more likely to agree. 

(d) 
‘The experiment requires that you continue.’ 1. The effects of social support were shown in Asch’s 


studies when: disagreeing. 2. The massacre of unarmed civilians at My Lai by (a) The size of the majority was increased from 2 4. Minority influence can lead to which kind of 
majority view. (d) Legitimacy of authority. (d) All of the above. 
(c) 
Publicly agreeing with the majority but privately 3. In Milgram’s findings, 65% of the participants: 

(a) 
Refused to continue at some point. American soldiers can be explained by: conformity? be correct. (a) Agentic state. (b) The task was more difficult because the lines 


to 14. 
(d) 
Conforming to a majority because we want to 


(b) 
Disobeyed at the start of the procedure. (a) Compliance. 

(c) 
Went to the top of the shock scale. (b) Identification. 

(b) Legitimacy of authority. were closer. 
(d) 
Went to 300 V and then refused to continue. (c) Both agentic state and legitimacy of authority. (c) The participants wrote their answers down (c) Internalisation. 

(d) Neither agentic state nor legitimacy of rather than stated them out loud. (d) Informational. 
authority. (d) One of the confederates dissented from the majority answer. 
MCQ answers 
Conformity  1D, 2C, 3B, 4B Conformity: Types and explanations  1B, 2B, 3C, 4A Conformity to social roles  1B, 2B, 3D, 4B Obedience  1A, 2C, 3C, 4B Obedience: Situational variables  1B, 2A, 3D, 4B Obedience: Situational explanations  1C, 2C, 3B, 4D Obedience: Dispositional explanation  1D, 2B, 3C, 4D Resistance to social infl uence  1D, 2D, 3C, 4B Minority infl uence  1B, 2B, 3A, 4C Social infl uence and social change  1A, 2D, 3B, 4D 
Research may help avoid mindless conformity, but participants were deceived. 
supports both. 
Minority in uence 
Minority inf uence leads to conversion and internalisation. 
Research Evaluation 
Consistency Research support for consistency 
If the minority is consistent (synchronic Moscovici’s blue-green slides and Wood or diachronic) this attracts the attention et al.’s meta-analysis. of the majority over time. 
Research support for deeper processing 
Commitment Participants exposed to minority view 
Personal sacriÿces show commitment, resisted con‹icting view (Martin et al.). 
attract attention, reinforce message Counterpoint – real-world majorities 
(augmentation). have more power/status than minorities, 
missing from research. 
Flexibility 
Minority more convincing if they accept Artiÿcial tasks some counterarguments. 
Tasks oƒen trivial so tell us little about 
real-world in‹uence. 
Explaining the process of change 
The three factors make majority think Evaluation extra: Power of minority more deeply about an issue. in„uence Snowball e‰ect – minority view gathers More people agree with minority in force and becomes majority in‹uence. private. 
In Australia 16% obeyed (Kilham and Mann) but 85% in Germany 
Evaluation extra: Ethical issues Evaluation extra: The danger of the F-scale is basis of AP explanation, but 
(Mantell), related to structure of society. 
Deception meant participants situational perspective has ‹aws (e.g. response bias) and so not 
could not properly consent Gives obedience alibi for destructive useful (Greenstein). (Baumrind). May be balanced by behaviour (Mandel). 
Cannot explain all (dis)obedience 
Rank and Jacobson’s nurses in hierarchical structure but did not obey legitimate authority. 
beneÿts of the research. 
Evaluation extra: Real-world crimes of obedience 
Social in uence and social change 
Rank and Jacobson found disobedience to doctors but stronger 
hierarchy and obedience at My Lai (Kelman and Hamilton). 
Psychological research can help us change society. 
Research 
Lessons from minority in„uence research 
Research support for normative in„uences 
Minority in‹uence is a powerful force for NSI valid explanation of social change, e.g. innovation and social change. reducing energy consumption (Nolan et al.). 
Resistance to social in uence 
E.g. civil rights marches (USA): in‹uence Counterpoint – normative in‹uence does not Explaining when people disobey and resist the pressure to conform. 
involves (1) drawing attention, (2) always produce change (Foxcroƒ et al.). consistency, (3) deeper processing (thinking), 
Social support Evaluation Locus of control Evaluation 
(4) augmentation (risks), (5) snowball e‰ect, 
Resisting conformity Real-world research support Locus of control (LOC) Research support 
(6) social cryptomnesia (forgetting). 
Conformity reduced by presence of Having a ‘buddy’ helps resist peer pressure LOC is sense of what directs events in our Internals less likely to fully obey in 
Lessons from conformity research 
dissenters from the group – even wrong to smoke (Albrecht et al.). lives – internal or external source (Rotter). Milgram-type procedure (Holland). 
Role of deeper processing 
Dissent breaks power of majority (Asch). answer breaks unanimity of majority (Asch). 
Research support for dissenting peers The LOC continuum Contradictory research 
It is majority views that are processed more Normative social in‹uence draws attention 
deeply than minority views, challenging Resisting obedience Obedience to an order from oil company fell High internal at one end and high external People now more independent but also to what majority is doing. 
central feature of minority in‹uence (Mackie). Obedience decreases in presence of when participants in a group (Gamson et al.). at the other. more external (Twenge et al.). 
disobedient peer who acts as a model to follow – challenges legitimacy of authority 
Lessons from obedience research Evaluation extra: Barriers to social change Evaluation extra: Social support explanation Resistance to social in„uence Evaluation extra: Limited role of LOC 
Disobedient role models (Milgram). 
People resist social change because minorities ÿgure. Obedience dropped from 65% to 10% Resistance lower (36% versus 64%) when Internals can resist social in‹uence, more Role of LOC only applies to new situations Gradual commitment leads to change 
seen negatively e.g. ‘tree-huggers’ (Bashir (Milgram). confederate had poor eyesight (Allen and conÿdent, less need for approval. (Rotter). et al.).(Zimbardo). 
Levine). 

How to use this book // 5 




What is Psychology? 
Some people think that psychology is just common sense – but it isn’t. In some ways, psychology can be seen as a test of common sense. Psychology has shown that what we have always strongly believed to be true often turns out to be wrong. And sometimes things that sound like wild ideas turn out to be true. 
Psychology specialises in what are called counter-intuitive findings. These are the results from psychological research studies that you just didn’t expect, which pleasingly and surprisingly contradict common sense. You read them, and you think, ‘Well, how about that then?’. 



You have probably had many experiences of having to make a decision about something important and agonising over it. Should I or shouldn’t I? 
For example, Cara’s daughter recently couldn’t decide whether or not she should break up with her boyfriend. I won’t list the things he had done wrong but she really wasn’t sure that he was the one. On the other hand she loved him. 
She eventually decided to stay with the relationship but kept asking herself, ‘Did I do the right thing, or would I be better off without him?’ 

Psychologists have explained Cara’s daughter’s confusion. Let’s begin with a study they carried out. 
They told students in their study: I am going to pay you £50 to spend an 
hour to turn the pegs on a board 90 degrees at a time. 
(So far, this sounds like a good deal. But there is a little more to it.) 

When you have fi nished I wonder if you would mind telling some other 
students that you actually really enjoyed the task. 

The two psychologists who did this study – Leon Festinger and James Carlsmith (1959) – demonstrated something quite surprising. What do you think the students said when they had to describe the task to another student? Those students who were paid a lot (it was actually $20 but the study was done in 1959) were a bit negative. But students who were paid a measly $1 gave a glowing account of what fun they had! 
If there is a budding psychologist inside you, you should be asking ‘That’s 
odd – I wonder why?’ Festinger and Carlsmith came up with a theory called cognitive dissonance. If you do a boring task for a lot of money and then have to tell someone it was fun, this produces no confl ict in your mind (‘I did it because I was paid a lot’). If you do a boring task and have to say it was fun but get very little money, you may be asking yourself, ‘why did I do that?’ – there is some confl ict in your mind. 
The students with confl ict had to fi nd an excuse for themselves about why they did such a boring task and lied, so they convinced themselves it wasn’t actually that boring – and that meant they could justify their behaviour to themselves. 
The theory of cognitive dissonance says that when we are faced with a decision that produces confl ict (dissonance), we want to reduce the confl ict. One way to do this is to increase or decrease the desirability of one of the options, and then the anxiety vapourises. 
Would you do it? 

And what does this have to do with Cara’s daughter and her boyfriend? 
Her distress is a state of cognitive dissonance – holding two con˜ icting thoughts – should I have ÿ nished the relationship or should I have continued? That creates discomfort and we naturally seek to reduce it. Cara’s daughter spoke to a friend, Alison, who was in a similar situation. Alison ended her relationship and says she has regretted it ever since. Alison’s ex has now found someone else. This makes Cara’s daughter feel better – she made the right choice. Her dissonance is reduced. 
Psychology is great! 
What is Psychology? // 7 


Psychology is the science of behaviour 

*When psychologists do research, the people in their studies are called ‘participants’. 

The even be˜er news is that psychologists don’t have all the answers. The truly great thing about psychology, the thing that really gets thousands of researchers and practitioners up in the mornings, is that there is still so much to learn and understand. There is still a lot of room for discussion and debate. And now you can join in. 
8 // What is Psychology? 

Step 5: Analyse the results and draw conclusions. You may present your results in a bar chart or may do a statistical test to see if your hypothesis is supported. 
Step 6: Evaluate and feed back. If the hypothesis has been rejected by the analysis, then it needs to be revised and retested. So we form a revised hypothesis … 
Even if your hypothesis is supported, you might come up with further ideas to refine your original hypothesis … 
Zajonc found that participants did rate the words heard more frequently as more likeable. So we can conclude that familiarity does not breed contempt. 
However, there are strengths and limitations of this study. Can you think of any? 

and experience 

People like to offer their own explanations for why people do what they do. 
Psychologists go beyond common sense and beyond personal opinions. The single thing that matters most in psychology is evidence. Real psychologists, as opposed to armchair ones, are expected to provide evidence for their every utterance (well, almost every one). 
Evidence doesn’t come from personal experience, or subjective opinion. It comes from what we call empirical data, which is what research studies are all about. 
Research studies are crucially important, and form the foundations of psychology. Psychologists do research studies – they write down what they did (procedures) and what they found (fi ndings). Then other psychologists can read about the studies and criticise them or design a new study. 
But let’s not be too dismissive of that 

armchair theorising. That’s the starting 
point of our psychological knowledge. 
We then use the evidence from studies 
to evaluate our theories, to change and 
develop them, to get as close to the truth 
about behaviour as we scientifically can. 
The key word is science. 
We think science is the best thing since sliced bread – but actually it isn’t a ‘thing’, it’s a process. It is a wonderful process that enables us to get closer and closer to understanding the world. This is the process: 
Step 1: Identify a research question or issue. This  For example (and lets take a simple example),  
usually stems from observing an interesting behaviour,  have you ever heard the saying ‘familiarity  
or from a broader psychological theory.  breeds contempt’ or ‘absence makes the heart  
grow fonder’? So which is true?  

Step 2: Decide on a topic to study (your aim). Your observations lead you to decide on a topic to study. In some kinds of scientific research a formal statement is made – a hypothesis. This is a statement of what you believe is true. You state this so that you can test to see whether it is supported by evidence and thus may reflect reality. 
Step 3: Design a study to test your hypothesis. This is where it gets remarkable. The key feature of science (as you should know from GCSE) is that it is controlled. There are many different kinds of study but let’s consider doing a controlled experiment like Festinger and Carlsmith’s (previous page) – we get one group of people to do a task in one way and we get another group of people to do a task differently so we can compare them. 
Step 4: Carry out the study. It’s very important to take due account of ethical issues when conducting the study (see facing page). 
In order to test our idea we need to go with one of the views – familiarity leads to increased liking rather than contempt. 
So here’s our hypothesis ‘You feel more positive about a word you hear ten times than a word you hear just once’. 
In fact Robert Zajonc (a well-known psychologist whose name just happens to be pronounced as ‘Science’ – yes, really) tested just such a hypothesis. He made up a list of words such as ZABULON and ENANWAL. 
Participants* were asked to listen to a list of words. One group of participants heard the word ZABULON 10 times in the list and a second group heard it once. The opposite was true for ENANWAL. 
At the end participants were asked to rate how much they liked all the words in the list. 

A mysterious student has been attending a class at Oregon State University for the past two months enveloped in a big black bag. Only his bare feet show. Each Monday, Wednesday and Friday at 11.00 am the Black Bag sits on a small table near the back of the classroom. The class is Speech 113 – basic persuasion … Charles Goetzinger, professor of the class, knows the identity of the person inside. None of his students in the class do. Goetzinger said the students’ attitude changed from hostility toward the Black Bag to curiosity and ÿnally to friendship. 
Taken from the Associated Press (27 February 1967) 
When Zajonc (1968) wrote a report of his study described on the facing page he began with the story above. It was the starting point for his study. This event in the basic persuasion class suggests that familiarity doesn’t breed contempt 
– it actually breeds liking for something. At least 
in some situations… He called this the mere exposure e.ect. 


Validity 





If you think about the study by Zajonc on the facing page, something might have occurred to you – participants would have realised that some of the words were repeated a lot. This may have led at least some participants to try to guess what the study was about and alter their behaviour. 
Therefore the results of the study might not actually represent anything real. This is an issue of 
validity – which refers to whether something is real or just an outcome of a research study that 
actually doesn’t represent reality. Validity is a di.cult topic to understand so don’t expect to get it 
all at once. But it is an issue of central importance in psychological research so you will need to get 
it eventually. 

Internal validity 











Internal validity concerns things inside a research study. It may be the question of whether we are testing what we actually intend to test. In our familiarity example, do you think we were actually testing whether familiarity makes something more likeable? 
Internal validity also concerns the question of ‘control’. It might be that other factors affected our 
findings. For example, some people might have heard the words ZABULON and ENANWAL before 
(not likely – that’s why they were chosen). But if they had, that would have spoiled everything. 
Researchers need to try to control everything that could cause the findings to be due to anything 
other than what was intended. This is something discussed in Chapter 6. 

External validity 









External validity is concerned with things outside the research study. To what extent can we generalise our research findings to other situations? Do you think Zajonc’s study could be used to explain why repeated adverts are very successful on TV? 

Research methods in Psychology 




















Psychologists use a variety of methods in their research – all of them aim to be scientific because they seek to be objective and controlled and repeatable. Often psychologists conduct experiments, which means they can draw conclusions about cause and effect. The main issue with experiments is they can be quite trivial, 
just looking at a few variables doesn’t always represent real life (you might feel that about Zajonc’s study). 
One alternative is to simply observe what people do in their everyday lives – psychologists watch people through two-way mirrors or from behind a bush in a park (not very often). The problem here is that, frequently, there is just too much going on to allow us to draw useful conclusions. Other methods include questionnaires, interviews, case studies and also performing correlational analysis. 
The key is using all kinds of different methods to study one aspect of behaviour and considering how the findings from the different kinds of study inform us. As research methods are so important to psychology, they feature very prominently throughout this book. 

Ethics in Psychology 












Ethics refers to standards of behaviour, behaving with due respect for the people (or animals) you are studying. Ethical issues matter in psychology because the potential for causing damage is so much greater in psychology than it is in, say, chemistry. The subject matter of psychology is alive and can get upset. It is all too easy to carry out studies that could expose people to embarrassment, anxiety, stress or even worse forms of psychological harm. 
So psychologists are always very careful to include steps to reduce this possibility, to make sure that the dignity and welfare of participants are protected. Ethical guidance is issued by professional psychological associations such as the British Psychological Society (BPS) or the American Psychological Association (APA). These organisations publish codes of conduct that psychologists and researchers have to follow in their research and professional practice. 
Statistical analysis in Psychology 


























We’ve seen that conducting empirical research is a fundamental activity of psychology, but it would all be wasted effort if we didn’t have a way of knowing what our results mean. This is where statistics come in. 
There are two types of statistics in widespread use in psychology – descriptive statistics and statistical tests. Descriptive statistics summarise data. They include measures such as the mean and drawing graphs. Such methods allow us to get a quick snapshot of the patterns in our data. Statistical tests are based on probability (see Chapter 6). The key thing for you to know is they tell us if any pattern in our results is just due to chance. 
Psychology is the science of behaviour and experience // 9 

Approaches 
In Chapter 4 we discuss approaches in psychology, so this is a very brief introduction to support you until you get to that chapter. 
The idea of an ‘approach’ is that psychologists tend to have a general view of what causes behaviour. Some psychologists think that the way we behave is largely inherited (that’s one approach), others believe it is largely learned through your life experience (another approach to understanding behaviour). 
For example – think about football. 

What is it that makes someone interested in football or good at it? Did they inherit some kind of football gene from their parents or did they learn to love it perhaps because their family enjoyed kicking a ball around? 
Psychologists call this nature (what you are born with) or nurture (your life experiences). 
Aside from views on nature–nurture, there are other key diff erences between the main approaches described on this page. Nature or nurture?     Or nappies? 
Biological approach 
The biological approach explains behaviour in terms of physical causes in our brains and bodies, and this includes our genes. 
The most likely biological source of causes of behaviour is the brain, which produces chemicals called neurotransmitters (such as serotonin, which plays an important role in regulating our moods). 
The endocrine system is also signifi cant because it produces hormones (for example adrenaline) that have a big impact on our behaviour. 
The methods used by this approach to investigate behaviour are physical too. Brain scans can show us the structure and functioning of the brain. Researchers then try to relate these to normal as well as abnormal behaviours. In the last 20 years the development of brain scanning techniques has led to a massive increase in understanding how the brain relates to behaviour. 
Research on animals can be helpful too, because we can’t deliberately make changes to the human brain to observe the eff ect on behaviour (no really, we can’t, not for research purposes). 
This approach to understanding behaviour is largely ‘nature’ – though many aspects of the brain and body and even your genes (surprisingly) can be changed by nurture. 
Behaviourist approach 
The central concept of this approach is the infl uence of experience on our behaviour, and how we learn behaviours. Basically we are born as ‘blank slates’ and what we become is shaped by experience (sometimes termed ‘the environment’). 
Basically we either learn through association (classical conditioning) or reinforcement (operant conditioning). 
If you have cats you will know that they come running as soon as they hear a cupboard door being opened. They have learned to associate that noise with food. 
You probably also know the usefulness of treats with animals – a small reward reinforces a behaviour and makes it more likely to happen in the future. 
These are examples of classical and operant conditioning. Whatever characteristics we might be born with, these take second place to the crucial roles of our experience and the environment. 
Because this approach is most closely associated with scientifi c psychology, it’s no surprise that behaviourists are cheerleaders for the laboratory research in psychology because it involves precise and objective measurement of behaviour in controlled conditions. The approach also uses research with animals, because it sees no signifi cant qualitative diff erences between human and animal behaviour. 
PS: There is also social learning theory, an extension of the behaviourist 
approach that incorporates indirect learning. 
AS level students only need to study the biological, behaviourist and cognitive approaches. A level students go on to study the psychodynamic and humanistic approaches. We have covered all these approaches in Chapter 4. 


Psychodynamic 









approach 






This is the approach that originated with Sigmund Freud, possibly the most well-known psychologist ever. He believed that the causes of behaviour lie within the unconscious mind, the part of the mind that is normally inaccessible but is extremely active. The iceberg metaphor has been used to represent this ‘invisible’ unconscious mind that has powerful effects (think Titanic). 
There is constant dynamic conflict between parts of the unconscious and the conscious mind. We can get a brief glimpse of this conflict when we dream, which is why Freud advocated the use of dream interpretation to help us understand what’s in the unconscious and why it affects us. 
The approach also emphasises the importance of childhood experiences, which have a major impact on our personality development and our behaviour as adults. 

Humanistic approach 















The humanistic approach is firmly based on the concept of the self. This concerns issues to do with your self-concept (how you see yourself), and your self-esteem (how you feel about yourself). 
The humanistic approach also emphasises the importance of being able to make our own rational choices. All of the other approaches suggest that our behaviour is, to a large extent, determined by other forces not always under our control – genes, the environment, our thought patterns, or our unconscious mind. Humanistic psychologists believe the goal of psychology is not prediction or control but to understand the whole person. 


Cognitive approach 















This approach focuses on thinking – our feelings, beliefs, attitudes and expectations and the effects they have on our behaviour. 
The approach employs the ‘computer metaphor’ to explain how our minds work. Like computers, we process information. 
The approach has been used to explain many things including mental disorders such as depression. According to the cognitive approach depression occurs because people think negatively – they put the worst possible interpretation on events and play down the good things that happen to them. They think it will never get better. This leads to despair. 
Like behaviourist psychologists, cognitive psychologists use laboratory research as a key research method. But a big difference is that while behaviourists have no interest in what goes on inside the mind, cognitive psychologists are the opposite. The processes inside the mind are precisely what they are interested in and have an important link to the behaviours we observe. 

Whatever works best 













The distance from the biological approach to the humanistic perspective represents the huge range that is psychology. 
Although researchers working in these two approaches may call themselves psychologists, they have very little in common in terms of their assumptions about behaviour, their preferred explanations, their philosophical viewpoints, the methods they use to investigate behaviour, or even the research questions they are interested in answering. 
That’s how broad a subject psychology is – and that’s one reason why it’s so exciting. These different approaches also reflect the undoubted truth that human behaviour is complex and is probably not going to be fully understood from just one approach. 
Because of this, in recent years, there has been a growth of the eclectic approach. This is preferred by psychologists who aren’t committed to any one particular approach. The eclectic approach uses the assumptions, explanations and methods from many different approaches. Their slogan could well be: ‘Whatever works best’. 







Psychology in the realworld 

The goals of Psychology 













Consider one of the really important health issues of our times – the obesity crisis in Britain. Here’s a disturbing statistic to be getting on with – over half of the men and women in Britain are overweight or clinically obese. Can psychology do anything to help? In the Apply it on the right we use obesity as an example to illustrate the goals of psychology below. 

Describing behaviour 













Psychologists want to be able to describe what is happening when people ‘behave’. This is mostly a matter of observation. Psychologists observe how behaviours are related to each other. They might, for example, notice that certain behaviours occur together quite o˜en and form a pattern. They might even begin to get an indication of which behaviours are ‘normal’ and which ‘abnormal’. Eventually, a˜er enough studies have been conducted, possible explanations of the behaviour emerge, which takes us on to the next goal of psychology. 

Explaining behaviour 











Describing behaviour is just a starting point. Psychologists really want to go beyond merely describing the behaviour that is happening and try to explain where it comes from, the reasons for it, what causes it. To do this, they formulate theories of behaviour and then use the scientiÿc method (see page 8) to test them. This of course is where disagreements emerge. There are many competing theories about the causes of behaviour, which o˜en re°ect the general approach psychologists adopt within psychology. Can psychologists do more than explain behaviour? Yes, they can predict behaviour. 

Predicting behaviour 










This is the logical next step. Once we are conÿdent that certain behaviours consistently occur under certain conditions, we can use that knowledge to predict how a person’s behaviour (including their thoughts) might change in the future. These predictions (known as hypotheses) can be turned into statements that can be tested in studies to see if the explanation was right. 
Controlling behaviour 













The idea that psychology should be in the business of controlling behaviour 
psychology attempt to do. For example, psychological therapies for mental disorders are not just about trying to understand or explain behaviours such as phobias or depression. The intention is to change people’s behaviour, from maladaptive, ‘abnormal’ behaviours that cause pain and su.ering to adaptive, ‘normal’ behaviours that bring happiness (or less pain, at least). 

12 // What is Psychology? 


of Psychology 
Describing obesity 
Researchers use various research methods to work out what obesity is and how it relates to other factors. For example, they may use questionnaires or interviews to learn about attitudes towards eating in obese people. Psychologists might observe people’s eating behaviour and measure how much people actually do eat. They might do brain scans to see if obese and thin people differ in thinking patterns. 

Explaining obesity 
The descriptions that are collected enable psychologists to develop explanations. There are several current explanations drawn from the whole range of approaches in psychology. There’s a biological explanation that explains obesity in terms of the activity of hormones and other chemicals within the body. There’s a behaviourist explanation that focuses on past learning experiences of rewards and punishments involving food. There’s also a cognitive explanation that emphasises the ways that we think about, interpret and perceive the meaning of food and eating. 

Predicting obesity 
If obesity is associated with inactivity, it is a short step to make the prediction that less active people are more likely to be overweight. 
If we identify depression as one of the causes of obesity, then again it is a simple matter to predict that depressed people are more likely to be obese. 


Controlling obesity 
There may even be a political dimension to behavioural control (see ‘The Nudge Unit’ on the facing page). The obesity crisis is a good example. Because the costs of obesity are so high (especially Type 2 diabetes) the government employs psychologists to devise 


The Nudge Unit 

This is the popular name for the Behavioural Insights Team, an organisation that used to be part of the UK government. It was formed to change behaviour one small step at a time (that is, to ‘nudge’ people into making small changes, because such changes are more achievable). 
For example, the Nudge Unit has devised projects to get more people to sign up to organ donation or to give blood, to encourage people to pay their taxes on time, to give more time and money to charity, reduce food waste, and so on. 
They even tried to offer some advice to the England team at the World Cup in 2014, by applying psychological research to taking better penalties (ironically, the team never had the chance to put this advice to the test). 
Here’s another example of behavioural control: 

The people at Schiphol Airport in Amsterdam wanted to know how you might stop men from missing the urinals and making a mess on the floor of the airport toilets. You could put up signs telling them to be more careful, or warn them of dire consequences if they don’t get their aim straightened out. 
But here’s a better idea. Men (OK, some men) like nothing more than having something to aim at. So men’s urinals at Schiphol Airport were given a small but significant redesign. A tiny black spot, in the shape of a fly, was inlaid into the middle of the pristine white porcelain urinal. It stood out like… well, like a fly on a white urinal. 
Although no truly scientific studies have been conducted into the effectiveness of this method, apparently Schiphol’s cleaning costs were reduced by 8%. 

Psychology in the real world // 13 





Chapter 1 Social influence 
Henry Fonda is a juror in the ÿlm Twelve Angry Men. The jury has to decide on the innocence or guilt of an 18-year-old boy accused of murder. 
Fonda alone believes that the accused is innocent. Everyone else in the room disagrees with him. 
Who will end up in°uencing whom? Will the minority of one convince the others, or will the majority rule? 
What would you do if you felt sure you were right and the others were wrong? How would you convince them? Or would you feel scared to oppose the others? Why would you feel scared? 
14 //  Chapter 1 Social influence 

Contents 
Conformity  Types and explanations Conformity to social roles Obedience Situational variables Situational explanations Dispositional explanation Resistance to social in˜uence Minority in˜uence Social in˜uence and social change 
Practical corner Revision summaries Practice questions, answers and feedback Multiple-choice questions 


Chapter 1 Contents // 15 

Conformity 
The specification says… 
Variables affecting conformity including group size, unanimity and task difficulty as investigated by Asch. 

Solomon Asch’s research has had a considerable impact on our understanding of conformity. We often ‘go along’ with other people in our everyday social lives. We agree with their opinions and change our behaviour to ‘ft in’ with theirs. In other words we conform. Asch wanted to fnd out why. 
Key terms 

Conformity˜‘A change in a person’s behaviour or opinions as a result of real or imagined pressure from a person or group of people.’ (Aronson 2011) 
Group size˜Asch increased the size of the group by adding more confederates, thus increasing the size of the majority. Conformity increased with group size, but only up to a point, levelling o° when the majority was greater than three. 
Unanimity˜The extent to which all the members of a group agree. In Asch’s studies, the majority was unanimous when all the confederates selected the same comparison line. This produced the greatest degree of conformity in the naïve participants. 
Task di°  culty˜Asch’s line-judging task is more di.cult when it becomes harder to work out the correct answer. Conformity increased because naïve participants assume that the majority is more likely to be right. 
Asch’s baseline procedure 
Standard and comparison lines 
123 American men were tested, each one in a group with other apparent participants. Each participant saw two large white cards on each trial. The line X on the le°-hand card is the standard line. The lines A, B and C are the three comparison lines. One of the comparison lines is always clearly the same length as X, the other two are substantially di.erent 

(i.e. clearly wrong). On each trial the participants had to say (out loud) which of the comparison lines was the same length as the standard line X. 
Physical arrangement of the participants in the study 
The participants were tested in 
groups of 6 to 8. Only one was 
a genuine (naïve) participant, 
always seated either last or 
(as here) next to last in the 
group. The others were all 
confederates of Asch – that is, 

they all gave the same (incorrect) scripted answers each time. 
The genuine participant did not know the others were ‘fake’ participants. 

Baseline ÿndings 
On average, the genuine participants agreed with confederates’ incorrect 
answers 36.8% of the time (i.e. they conformed about a third of the time). 
There were individual di.erences, 25% of the participants never gave a 
wrong answer (i.e. never conformed). 




The big night out 
Some students are celebrating the end of their exams by having a night out. They have been in the pub all evening and are now discussing which nightclub to go on to. Imogen prefers Rotting Flesh but the majority of the group wants to go to Scar Tissue. 
Question 
Brie˜y explain how each of the following factors might affect whether or not Imogen conforms to the majority: (a) Group size, (b) Unanimity, 
(c) Task difÿculty. 

4. Asch used a volunteer sampling method to recruit his participants. Explain one strength and one limitation of this sampling method. (4˜marks)

Evaluation eXtra 
5. When the total group size was four there would be only one naïve participant and the others were confederates. Express the number of confederates as a fraction and a percentage of the total group size. (2˜marks) 
Check it 





Conformity: Types and explanations 
The specification says… 
Types of conformity: internalisation, identification and compliance. 
Explanations for conformity: informational social influence and normative social influence. 

You learned about conformity on the previous spread. Asch looked at a number of di˜erent factors that a˜ect how much we conform. These are explanations for conformity. 
On this spread we will look at some more explanations for why people conform. We will start by looking at di˜erent levels or types of conformity. 
Key terms 

Internalisation˜A deep type of conformity where we take on the majority view because we accept it as correct. It leads to a far-reaching and permanent change in behaviour, even when the group is absent. 
Identif cation˜A moderate type of conformity where we act in the same way as the group because we value it and want to be part of it. But we don’t necessarily agree with everything the group/majority believes. 
Compliance˜A superfcial and temporary type of conformity where we outwardly go along with the majority view, but privately disagree with it. The change in our behaviour only lasts as long as the group is monitoring us. 
Informational social infuence (ISI)˜ 
An explanation of conformity that says we agree with the opinion of the majority because we believe it is correct. We accept it because we want to be correct as well. This may lead to internalisation (see above). 
Normative social infuence (NSI)˜An explanation of conformity that says we agree with the opinion of the majority because we want to gain social approval and be liked. This may lead to compliance (see above). 




Social infuence at college 
It is Oliver’s and Lola’s ÿrst day at college and they are keen to make a good impression. Oliver pretends to be interested in the other students’ conversations even though he really ÿnds them boring. Lola watches other students very carefully because she wants to complete her work just like they do, to avoid making any mistakes. 
Question 
Whose behaviour is being in°uenced by informational social in°uence, Oliver’s or Lola’s? Whose is being in°uenced by normative social in°uence? Explain both of your answers. 
There are many reasons for going along with the other people in a group. Often, it's so we can be accepted and liked by them, even if we don't really share their values and opinions. 
Real-life application 
Wesley Schultz et al. (2008) found they were able to change the behaviour of hotel guests by using printed messages encouraging them to save energy. The messages that suggested other guests were using fewer bath towels were the most successful. 
Question 
Does this demonstrate ISI or NSI? Explain your 
Evaluation 
answer. 
Research support for NSI 
One strength of NSI is that evidence supports it as an explanation of conformity. 
For example, when Asch (1951, see previous spread) interviewed his participants, some said they conformed because they felt self-conscious giving the correct answer and they were afraid of disapproval. When participants wrote their answers down, conformity fell to 12.5%. This is because giving answers privately meant there was no normative group pressure. 
This shows that at least some conformity is due to a desire not to be rejected by the group for disagreeing with them (i.e. NSI). 
Research support for ISI 
Another strength is that there is research evidence to support ISI from the study by Todd Lucas et al. (2006, see previous spread). 
Lucas et al. found that participants conformed more oft en to incorrect answers they were given when the maths problems were diffi  cult. This is because when the problems were easy the participants ‘knew their own minds’ but when the problems were hard the situation became ambiguous (unclear). The participants did not want to be wrong, so they relied on the answers they were given. 
This shows that ISI is a valid explanation of conformity because the results are what ISI would predict. 
Counterpoint However, it is oft en unclear whether it is NSI or ISI at work in 
research studies (or in real life). For example, Asch (1955) found that conformity is 
reduced when there is one other dissenting participant (see previous spread). The 
dissenter may reduce the power of NSI (because they provide social support) or they 
may reduce the power of ISI (because they provide an alternative source of social 
information). Both interpretations are possible. 
Therefore, it is hard to separate ISI and NSI and both processes probably operate 
together in most real-world conformity situations. 
Individual differences in NSI 
One limitation is that NSI does not predict conformity in every case. 
Some people are greatly concerned with being liked by others. Such people are called nA.  liators – they have a strong need for ‘affi  liation’ (i.e. they want to relate to other people). Paul McGhee and Richard Teevan (1967) found that students who were nAffi  liators were more likely to conform. 
This shows that NSI underlies conformity for some people more than it does for others. There are individual diff erences in conformity that cannot be fully explained by one general theory of situational pressures. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Is the NSI/ISI distinction useful? 
The counterpoint (above) suggests the distinction is not useful because it is impossible to work out which is operating. Lucas et al.’s fi ndings could be due to NSI, ISI or both. 
However, Asch’s research from the previous spread clearly demonstrates both NSI and ISI as reasons for conformity. For instance in terms of group unanimity, a unanimous group is a powerful source of disapproval. The possibility of rejection is a strong reason for conforming (NSI). But it is also true that a unanimous group conveys the impression that everyone is ‘in the know’ apart from you (ISI). 
Consider: Using Asch’s research, is the distinction between ISI and NSI useful? 
Conformity at work 
A psychologist studied conformity by observing ÿ ve people starting new jobs in an ofÿ ce of a major British retail company. 
Questions 
1. 
Explain why this could be considered to be a naturalistic observation. (2 marks) 

2. 
Explain one strength and one limitation of naturalistic observation. (2 marks + 2 marks) 

3. 
The psychologist needed to devise some behavioural categories. So she had to decide which behaviours could be considered examples of conformity. Explain what is meant by behavioural categories. (2 marks) 

4. 
Give three examples of possible behavioural categories in the context of this study. (3 marks) 

5. 
The psychologist used event sampling to observe conforming behaviours over a two-week period during break-times and lunchtimes. Explain what is meant by event sampling. (2 marks) 

6. 
When the psychologist analysed her results, she found high levels of conforming behaviour by people starting new jobs. Use your knowledge of informational social in˜ uence and normative social in˜ uence to explain why people might conform in this situation. (4 marks) 


Study tip 
There are two other relevant explanations for conformity in this chapter – the inf uence of social roles (see next spread) and having an external locus of control (see page 30). 
Check it 
1. 
Explain internalisation as a type of conformity.  [2 marks] 

2. 
Explain what is meant by ‘informational social in˜ uence’ in relation to conformity. 


[2 marks] 
3. 
Outline normative social in˜ uence as an explanation for conformity.  [4 marks] 

4. 
Describe and evaluate informational social in˜ uence and normative social in˜ uence as explanations for conformity.  


[12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 
 Conformity: Types and explanations // 19 
Conformity to social roles 
The specification says… 
Conformity to social roles as investigated by Zimbardo. 
We turn our attention on this spread to a special kind of conformity. Previously, we’ve looked at our tendency to conform to the behaviours or opinions of other people when they form the majority of a group. But to what extent do we conform to the expectations that people have of us? These expectations arise out of the roles we play in society and are powerful inf uences on our behaviour. 
Key term 
Social roles˜The ‘parts’ people play as members of various social groups. Everyday examples include parent, child, student, passenger and so on. These are accompanied by expectations we and others have of what is appropriate behaviour in each role, for example caring, obedient, industrious, etc. 
In the Stanford prison experiment both prisoners and guards were given uniforms that would help dictate their social roles. 
A mock psychiatric ward 
This scenario is based on an actual study by Norma Jean Orlando (1973). 
A researcher decided to investigate how conformity to social roles can in˜ uence people to behave in extreme ways. She selected staff at a psychiatric hospital to play the roles of patients on a ward for one week. After two days, several mock patients experienced symptoms of psychological disturbance, some cried uncontrollably, others became extremely withdrawn, and a few tried to escape. As time went on, most of the participants became more anxious and depressed, and felt very strongly that they were trapped and isolated. The study had to be ended early because some ‘patients’ were losing their sense of self-identity. 
Question 
Use your knowledge of Zimbardo’s research into conformity to social roles to explain why the mock patients behaved as they did. 
Zimbardo’s research 
In the 1970s Philip Zimbardo and colleagues conducted one of the most memorable studies in psychology. There had been many prison riots in America and Zimbardo wanted to know why prison guards behave brutally – was it because they have sadistic personalities or was it their social role (as a prison guard) that created such behaviour? 
The Stanford prison experiment (SPE) 
Zimbardo et al. (1973) set up a mock prison in the basement of the psychology department at Stanford University. They selected 21 men (student volunteers) who tested as ‘emotionally stable’. The students were randomly assigned to play the role of prison guard or prisoner. 
Prisoners and guards were encouraged to conform to social roles both through the uniforms they wore and also instructions about their behaviour. 
Uniforms  The prisoners were given a loose smock to wear and a cap to cover their hair, and they were identifi ed by number (their names were never used). The guards had their own uniform refl ecting the status of their role, with wooden club, handcuff s and mirror shades. 
These uniforms created a loss of personal identity (called de-individuation), and meant they would be more likely to conform to the perceived social role. 
Instructions about behaviour  The prisoners were further encouraged to identify with their role by several procedures. For example rather than leaving the study early, prisoners could ‘apply for parole’. The guards were encouraged to play their role by being reminded that they had complete power over the prisoners. 
Findings related to social roles 
The guards took up their roles with enthusiasm, treating the prisoners harshly. Within two days, the prisoners rebelled. They ripped their uniforms and shouted and swore at the guards, who retaliated with fi re extinguishers. 
The guards used ‘divide-and-rule’ tactics by playing the prisoners off  against each other. They harassed the prisoners constantly, to remind them of the powerlessness of their role. For example they conducted frequent headcounts, sometimes at night, when the prisoners would stand in line and call out their numbers. The guards highlighted the diff erences in social roles by creating opportunities to enforce the rules and administer punishments. 
Aft er their rebellion was put down, the prisoners became subdued, depressed and anxious. One was released because he showed symptoms of psychological disturbance. Two more were released on the fourth day. One prisoner went on a hunger strike. The guards tried to force-feed him and then punished him by putting him in ‘the hole’, a tiny dark closet. 
The guards identifi ed more and more closely with their role. Their behaviour became increasingly brutal and aggressive, with some of them appearing to enjoy the power they had over the prisoners. Zimbardo ended the study aft er six days instead of the intended 14. 
Conclusions related to social roles 
Social roles appear to have a strong infl uence on individuals’ behaviour. The guards became brutal and the prisoners became submissive. 
Such roles were very easily taken on by all participants. Even volunteers who came in to perform specifi c functions (such as the ‘prison chaplain’) found themselves behaving as if they were in a prison rather than in a psychological study. 
Abu Ghraib 
From 2003 to 2004, United States Army Military Police personnel committed serious human rights violations against Iraqi prisoners at Abu Ghraib prison in Baghdad. The prisoners were tortured, physically and sexually abused, routinely humiliated and some were murdered. Zimbardo noticed some remarkable similarities between the behaviour of the personnel at Abu Ghraib and the guards in the Stanford prison experiment. 
Question 
Using your knowledge of Zimbardo’s research, explain what happened at Abu Ghraib in terms of conformity to social roles. 



In our society there are many social roles in which men and women are portrayed as behaving differently, such as parenting behaviour. A psychologist was interested in studying conformity to gender roles in parenting. She decided to conduct an observational study of parents of one-year-old children. 
Her hypothesis was that the parenting behaviour of mothers and fathers would conform to stereotypical gender roles – mothers would behave in stereotypically ‘feminine’ ways and fathers in stereotypically ‘masculine’ ways. More speciÿcally, she predicted that mothers would show more ‘caring’ behaviours and fathers more ‘aggressive’ behaviours. 
Questions 
1. 
Identify one behavioural category to record ‘caring’ behaviour and one to record ‘aggressive’ behaviour. (2˜marks) 

2. 
The psychologist decided to use time sampling to record her observations. Explain what is meant by time sampling. (2˜marks) 

3. 
Explain why the psychologist might carry out a pilot study before the main observation. (3 marks) 

4. 
Identify two ethical issues the psychologist should consider before conducting her investigation. (2 marks) 

5. 
Explain how she could deal with one of these issues. (2˜marks) 

6. 
The psychologist’s hypothesis was supported by her ÿndings. Use your knowledge of conformity to social roles to explain this outcome. (3 marks) 


The abuses at Abu Ghraib prison (described on the facing page) woke up the whole world to how the power of the situation and of social roles can make apparently ordinary people 
(i.e. people with no apparent antisocial attitudes) do evil things. 


conformity to social roles.  [6 marks] 
3. Discuss research into conformity to social roles. 
[12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 
 Conformity to social roles // 21 
Obedience 
The specification says… 
Obedience, as investigated by Milgram. 

Stanley Milgram sought an answer to the question of why such a high proportion of the German population obeyed Hitler’s commands to murder over 6 million Jews in the Holocaust as well as 5 million Romani, homosexuals, black Germans, Poles and members of other social groups during the Second World War. 
He thought one possible explanation was that Germans were di.erent from people from other countries – perhaps they were more obedient. In order to determine this he needed a procedure which could assess how obedient people are. 
Key term 

Obedience˜A form of social infuence in which an individual follows a direct order. The person issuing the order is usually a fgure of authority, who has the power to punish when obedient behaviour is not forthcoming. 


Milgram was not breaking any ofÿcial ethical guidance at the time because none existed. It was because of his research (and that of Zimbardo a few years later) that ethical issues became an urgent priority for psychology. 
All professional psychological associations publish and frequently update ethical guidance for practising psychologists and researchers. In Britain, the British Psychological Society (BPS) produces a Code of Ethics and Conduct that is described and discussed on pages 178–179. It addresses several issues, including: 
• 
A participant’s right to withdraw from the research. 

• 
The need to get fully informed consent from the participants. 

• 
The use of deception. 

• 
The importance of protecting participants from the risk of psychological and physical harm. 


Questions 
1. 
For each of these ethical issues, identify how they arose in Milgram’s study. 

2. 
What steps did Milgram take to address these issues? 

3. 
To what extent do you think he was successful? 




Further procedural detail of Milgram s research 
Milgram s participants were men (aged 20 50 years) who came from the area around New Haven, Connecticut, USA. They were volunteers recruited through a newspaper advert or mailshot, and were paid $4.50 for participating. The Learner (called ‘Mr Wallace ) was strapped into a chair and wired up with electrodes. The Teacher (the real participant) was given a small shock to experience for themselves. This was the only genuine shock in the procedure. 
The Learner had to remember pairs of words. Each time he made an error, the Teacher delivered a stronger (fake) ‘electric shock’ by pressing switches on a 
shock machine . The switches were labelled from ‘slight shock’ through ‘intense shock’ to ‘danger – severe shock . When the Teacher got to 300 volts the Learner pounded on the wall and then gave no response to the next question. At 315 volts he again pounded on the wall but was then silent for the rest of the procedure. 
Experimenter
The four standard ‘prods’ the Experimenter used to order the Teacher to continue were: 
Prod 1 – ‘Please continue’ or Please go on. 
Prod 2 – ‘The experiment requires that you continue. 
Prod 3 – ‘It is absolutely essential that you continue. 
Prod 4 – ‘You have no other choice, you must go on. 

Evaluation 
Research support 
One strength is that Milgram’s fi ndings were replicated in a French documentary that was made about reality TV. 
This documentary (Beauvois et al. 2012) focused on a game show made especially for the programme. The participants in the ‘game’ believed they were contestants in a pilot episode for a new show called Le Jeu de la Mort (The Game of Death). They were paid to give (fake) electric shocks (ordered by the presenter) to other participants (who were actually actors) in front of a studio audience. 80% of the participants delivered the maximum shock of 460 volts to an apparently unconscious man. Their behaviour was almost identical to that of Milgram’s participants – nervous laughter, nail-biting and other signs of anxiety. 
This supports Milgram’s original fi ndings about obedience to authority, and demonstrates that the fi ndings were not just due to special circumstances. 
Low internal validity 
One limitation is that Milgram’s procedure may not have been testing what he intended to test. 
Milgram reported that 75% of his participants said they believed the shocks were genuine. However Martin Orne and Charles Holland (1968) argued that participants behaved as they did because they didn’t really believe in the set up, so they were ‘play-acting’. Gina Perry’s (2013) research confi rms this. She listened to tapes of Milgram’s participants and reported that only about half of them believed the shocks were real. Two-thirds of these participants were disobedient. 
This suggests that participants may have been responding to demand characteristics, trying to fulfi l the aims of the study. 
Counterpoint However, Charles Sheridan and Richard King (1972) 
conducted a study using a procedure like Milgram’s. Participants (all students) 
gave real shocks to a puppy in response to orders from an experimenter. 
Despite the real distress of the animal, 54% of the men and 100% of the 
women gave what they thought was a fatal shock. 
This suggests that the eff ects in Milgram’s study were genuine because 
people behaved obediently even when the shocks were real. 
Alternative interpretation of f ndings 
Another limitation is that Milgram’s conclusions about blind obedience may not be justifi ed. 
Alex Haslam et al. (2014) showed that Milgram’s participants obeyed when the Experimenter delivered the fi rst three verbal prods (see facing page). However, every participant who was given the fourth prod (‘You have no other choice, you must go on’) without exception disobeyed. According to social identity theory (SIT), participants in Milgram’s study only obeyed when they identifi ed with the scientifi c aims of the research (‘The experiment requires that you continue’). When they were ordered to blindly obey an authority fi gure, they refused. 
This shows that SIT may provide a more valid interpretation of Milgram’s fi ndings, especially as Milgram himself suggested that ‘identifying with the science’ is a reason for obedience. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Ethical issues 
The participants in this study were deceived. For example, the participants thought that the allocation of roles (Teacher and Learner) was random, but in fact it was fi xed. They also thought the shocks were real. Milgram dealt with this by debriefi ng participants. 
However, Diana Baumrind (1964) criticised Milgram for deceiving his participants. She objected because she believed that deception in psychological studies can have serious consequences for participants and researchers. 
Consider: How might deception be a limitation of Milgram’s research? Do the beneÿ ts outweigh the costs? 
Milgram’s debrief ng 
At the end of the procedure, Milgram carried out a debrieÿ ng session with each of his participants. This was an opportunity for him to explain the true purpose of the study and what had really happened. It was also intended to make the participants feel better about their role in the study, especially if they had been completely obedient throughout. 
Part of the debrieÿ ng was a structured interview to ask participants questions about their experiences in the study. Milgram also wanted to collect qualitative data about the reasons why participants obeyed or disobeyed the Experimenter. 
Questions 
1. 
Explain one strength and one limitation of a structured interview. (2 + 2 marks) 

2. 
Explain one difference between a structured interview and an unstructured interview. (2 marks) 

3. 
Explain what is meant by qualitative data and give an example from Milgram’s study. (2 marks) 

4. 
Write one suitable question Milgram could have asked in the interviews to collect qualitative data. (1 mark) 

5. 
Explain what is meant by quantitative data. (1 mark) 

6. 
Write one suitable question Milgram could have asked in the interviews to collect quantitative data. (1 mark) 


When nurses disobey 
Charles Ho˜ ing et al. (1966) arranged for an unknown doctor to telephone 22 nurses and ask each of them (alone) to administer an overdose of a drug that was not on their ward list (‘Astroten’). A startling 95% of nurses (21 out of 22) started to administer the drug (they were prevented from continuing). The nurses obeyed without question. 
Steven Rank and Cardell Jacobson (1977) replicated Ho˜ ing et al.’s study but altered some aspects of the original procedure that might have maximised obedience. 
For instance, being given an order over the telephone was unusual. It was also unusual to be asked to administer an unknown drug. In the Rank and Jacobson study the nurses were told by a doctor to administer an overdose of valium, a real drug that the nurses would have been familiar with. The doctor’s name was also known to the nurses and they all had the chance to discuss the order with each other. 
In these more realistic circumstances, only two out of 18 nurses 
obeyed the doctor’s order (before they were prevented from 
carrying it out). 
Question 
What would you conclude about obedience to authority from these studies? 
Check it 
1. 
Explain what is meant by ‘obedience’.  [2 marks] 

2. 
Describe the procedure and ÿ ndings of one study investigating obedience. [6 marks] 

3. 
Describe and evaluate Milgram’s research into obedience. [12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 


 Obedience // 23 
Obedience: Situational variables 
The specification says… 
Explanations for obedience: situational variables affecting obedience including proximity and location, as investigated by Milgram, and uniform. 

Milgram’s ‘baseline study’, described on the previous spread, established a method he could repeat and vary, and use to place a numerical value on obedience. Milgram began his research with the belief that obedience might be due to personality – were the Germans di˜erent? However, he found that situational factors might explain obedience better. He continued to explore this in further studies. 
Key terms 

Situational variables˜Features of the immediate physical and social environment which may infuence a person’s behaviour (such as proximity, location and uniform). The alternative is dispositional variables where behaviour is explained in terms of personality. 
Proximity˜The physical closeness or distance of an authority fgure to the person they are giving an order to. Also refers to the physical closeness of the Teacher to the victim (Learner) in Milgram’s studies. 
Location˜The place where an order is issued. The relevant factor that infuences obedience is the status or prestige associated with the location. 
Uniform˜People in positions of authority often have a specifc outft that is symbolic of their authority, for example police o.cers and judges. This indicates that they are entitled to expect our obedience. 


Evaluation 
Research support 
One strength is that other studies have demonstrated the infl uence of situational variables on obedience. 
In a fi eld experiment in New York City, Leonard Bickman (1974) had three confederates dress in diff erent outfi ts – jacket and tie, a milkman’s outfi t and a security guard’s uniform. The confederates individually stood in the street and asked passers-by to perform tasks such as picking up litter or handing over a coin for the parking meter. People were twice as likely to obey the assistant dressed as a security guard than the one dressed in jacket and tie. 
This supports the view that a situational variable, such as a uniform, does have a powerful eff ect on obedience. 
Cross-cultural replications 
Another strength of Milgram’s research is that his fi ndings have been replicated in other cultures. 
For instance, Wim Meeus and Quintin Raaijmakers (1986) used a more realistic procedure than Milgram’s to study obedience in Dutch participants. The participants were ordered to say stressful things in an interview to someone (a confederate) desperate for a job. 90% of the participants obeyed. The researchers also replicated Milgram’s fi ndings concerning proximity. When the person giving the orders was not present, obedience decreased dramatically.  
This suggests that Milgram’s fi ndings about obedience are not just limited to Americans or men, but are valid across cultures and apply to women too. 
Counterpoint However, replications of Milgram’s research are not very ‘cross-cultural’. Peter Smith and Michael Bond (1998) identifi ed just two replications between 1968 and 1985 that took place in India and Jordan – both countries culturally quite diff erent from the US. Whereas the other countries involved 
(e.g. Spain, Australia, Scotland) are culturally quite similar to the US (e.g. they have similar notions about the role of authority). 
Therefore, it may not be appropriate to conclude that Milgram’s fi ndings (including those about proximity, location and uniform) apply to people in all or most cultures. 
Low internal validity 
One limitation is that participants may have been aware the procedure was faked. 
Martin Orne and Charles Holland (1968) made this criticism of Milgram’s baseline study. They point out that it is even more likely in his variations because of the extra manipulation of variables. A good example is the variation where the Experimenter is replaced by a ‘member of the public’. Even Milgram recognised that this situation was so contrived that some participants may well have worked out the truth. 
Therefore, in all of Milgram’s studies it is unclear whether the fi ndings are genuinely due to the operation of obedience or because the participants saw through the deception and just ‘play-acted’ 
(i.e. responded to demand characteristics). 
Evaluation eXtra 
The danger of the situational perspective 
Milgram’s research fi ndings support a situational explanation of obedience (proximity, location and uniform are all aspects of the situation). 
But this perspective has been criticised by David Mandel (1998) who argues that it off ers an excuse or ‘alibi’ for evil behaviour. In his view, it is off ensive to survivors of the Holocaust to suggest that the Nazis were simply obeying orders. Milgram’s explanation also ignores the role of dispositional factors (such as personality), implying that the Nazis were victims of situational factors beyond their control. 
Consider: Is the situational perspective justiÿ ed? 
Obedience in the supermarket 
As everyone knows, teachers have lives outside work. Students might even be lucky enough to see a teacher they recognise at the weekend, shopping or suchlike. One day, in the college canteen, a teacher asked a student to pick up a piece of litter and put it in the bin. The student duly obliged. A few days later, outside a local supermarket, another teacher asked the same student to pick up some litter and bin it. This time the student refused. 
Question 
Using your knowledge of Milgram’s variations, explain this difference in the student’s behaviour. 
Not all uniforms are symbols of authority. Perhaps sometimes a uniform is just about being smartly dressed. 
Milgram and proximity 
The graph of results from Milgram’s variations on the facing page of this spread gives obedience rates relating to proximity, location and uniform, plus the original baseline result. Use that information to answer the following questions. 
Questions 
1. 
Draw up a table to present the results provided in the graph. Make sure you label the table accurately and clearly. (3 marks) 

2. 
Use your knowledge of research to explain what these results tell us about the effect of situational variables on obedience. (3 marks) 

3. 
There were 50 participants in the ‘Teacher and Learner in the same room’ variation. Calculate the number of participants who obeyed. (2 marks) 

4. 
Milgram carried out several pilot studies of his procedure. Explain what is meant by a pilot study. (1˜mark) 

5. 
Explain two strengths of carrying out a pilot study. (2˜marks + 2 marks) 

6. 
One limitation of Milgram’s studies is that the ÿ ndings were in˜ uenced by demand characteristics. What is meant by demand characteristics? (1 mark) 

7. 
Explain how demand characteristics might have in˜ uenced the results of Milgram’s studies. (3 marks) 


Check it 
1. Milgram investigated situational variables affecting obedience to authority. Identify two of these variables and explain how each of them affects obedience. 
[3 marks + 3 marks] 
2. 
Explain how Milgram investigated proximity. In your answer include the procedure and what he concluded.  [4 marks] 

3. 
Describe and evaluate two situational variables that have been shown by Milgram to affect obedience to authority. 


[12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 
 Obedience: Situational variables // 25 
Obedience: Situational explanations 
The specification says… 
Explanations for obedience: agentic state 
and legitimacy of authority. 
On the previous spread we explored situational variables that inf uence levels of obedience – proximity, location and uniform. This is one way to explain why people obey – because of characteristics of people around you. Now we turn to two further explanations which are situational but this time concern the dynamics of social hierarchies. 
Key terms 
Agentic state˜A mental state where we feel no personal responsibility for our behaviour because we believe ourselves to be acting for an authority f gure, i.e. as their agent. This frees us from the demands of our consciences and allows us to obey even a destructive authority f gure. 
Legitimacy of authority˜An explanation for obedience which suggests that we are more likely to obey people who we perceive to have authority over us. This authority is justif ed (legitimate) by the individual’s position of power within a social hierarchy. 
I will obey 
Max’s younger sister ÿ nds out that he has a bag of sweets. ‘Give me one of those sweets,’ she demands, trying to snatch the bag from his hand. But Max refuses. Just then, Max’s dad comes into the room. He has ÿ nally had enough, so he tells Max: ‘Your room is a complete disgrace, go and tidy it up immediately. And when you’ve done that, you can go to the shops and get me a loaf of bread.’ Max replies, ‘Certainly dad, I’ll go and do that right now.’ 
Question 
Use your knowledge of why people obey to explain Max’s behaviour. Refer to both the agentic state and legitimacy of authority explanations. 
Agentic state 
Stanley Milgram’s initial interest in obedience was sparked by the trial of Adolf Eichmann in 1961 for war crimes. Eichmann had been in charge of the Nazi death camps and his defence was that he was only obeying orders. This led Milgram to propose that obedience to destructive authority occurs because a person does not take responsibility. Instead they believe they are acting for someone else, i.e. that they are an ‘agent’. An ‘agent’ is someone who acts for or in place of another. 
An agent is not an unfeeling puppet – they experience high anxiety (‘moral strain’) when they realise that what they are doing is wrong, but feel powerless to disobey. 
Autonomous state 
The opposite of being in an agentic state is being in an autonomous state. ‘Autonomy’ means to be independent or free. So a person in an autonomous state is free to behave according to their own principles and feels a sense of responsibility for their own actions. 
The shift  from autonomy to ‘agency’ is called the agentic shift. Milgram (1974) suggested that this occurs when a person perceives someone else as an authority fi gure. The authority fi gure has greater power because they have a higher position in a social hierarchy. In most social groups, when one person is in charge others defer to the legitimate authority (see below) of this person and shift  from autonomy to agency. 
Binding factors 
Milgram observed that many of his participants said they wanted to stop but seemed powerless to do so. He wondered why they remained in an agentic state. The answer is binding factors – aspects of the situation that allow the person to ignore or minimise the damaging eff ect of their behaviour and thus reduce the ‘moral strain’ they are feeling. Milgram proposed a number of strategies that the individual uses, such as shift ing the responsibility to the victim (‘he was foolish to volunteer’) or denying the damage they were doing to the victims. 
Legitimacy of authority 
Most societies are structured in a hierarchical way. This means that people in certain positions hold authority over the rest of us. For example, parents, teachers, police offi  cers, nightclub bouncers… all have authority over us at times. The authority they wield is legitimate in the sense that it is agreed by society. Most of us accept that authority fi gures have to be allowed to exercise social power over others because this allows society to function smoothly. 
One of the consequences of this legitimacy of authority is that some people are granted the power to punish others. We generally agree that the police and courts have the power to punish wrongdoers. So we are willing to give up some of our independence and to hand control of our behaviour over to people we trust to exercise their authority appropriately. We learn acceptance of legitimate authority from childhood, from parents initially and then teachers and adults generally. 
Destructive authority 
Problems arise when legitimate authority becomes destructive. History has too oft en shown that charismatic and powerful leaders (such as Hitler, Stalin and Pol Pot) can use their legitimate powers for destructive purposes, ordering people to behave in ways that are cruel and dangerous. Destructive authority was obvious in Milgram’s study, when the Experimenter used prods to order participants to behave in ways that went against their consciences. 
Massacre at My Lai 
Milgram’s ÿ ndings have been used to explain the notorious war crime at My Lai 
in 1968 during the Vietnam War. As many as 504 unarmed civilians were killed by 
American soldiers. Women were gang-raped and people were shot down as they 
emerged from their homes with their hands in the air. The soldiers blew up buildings, 
burned the village to the ground and killed all the animals. Only one soldier faced 
charges and was found guilty, Lt William Calley. His defence was the same as the Nazi 
ofÿ cers at the Nuremberg trials, that he was only doing his duty by following orders. 
Question 
Explain the behaviour of the soldiers in terms of agentic state and legitimacy of authority. 


He produced a questionnaire and distributed it to 200 students at a local sixth-form college. When he returned the next day to collect the questionnaires, he found that 160 students had completed it. 
Questions 
1. Identify two methods the psychologist could have used to select a sample of participants. Explain one strength and one limitation of one of these methods. (2 marks + 2 marks + 2 marks) 

Obedience: Dispositional explanation 
The specification says… 
Dispositional explanation for obedience: the Authoritarian Personality. 
Not all psychologists accept that obedience can be fully explained by factors in the situation or the social structure. They reason that there must be at least some role for the personality or disposition of the individual. After all, not all of Milgram’s participants fully obeyed, and some actively rebelled, despite them experiencing identical situational and social pressures. 
There are several dispositional explanations of obedience, but the most inf uential concerns the Authoritarian Personality. 
Key terms 
Dispositional explanation˜Any explanation of behaviour that highlights the importance of the individual’s personality (i.e. their disposition). Such explanations are often contrasted with situational explanations. 
Authoritarian Personality (AP) A type of personality that Adorno argued was especially susceptible to obeying people in authority. Such individuals are also thought to be submissive to those of higher status and dismissive of inferiors. 
Consistently harsh and critical parenting can lead to the development of an Authoritarian Personality when the child becomes an adult. 
Trouble with the boss 
Leon works in the Head Ofÿ ce of a big national company. His boss is always shouting at people and telling them what to do in no uncertain terms. The ° oor Leon works on is open-plan so his boss can easily see what everyone is doing. Leon has noticed that his boss is always sucking up to the senior managers at every opportunity. 
Question 
Explain the behaviour of Leon’s boss in terms of (a) situational variables, (b) social structures/hierarchies, (c) dispositional factors. 
The Authoritarian Personality 
Like Milgram, Theodor Adorno and his colleagues wanted to understand the anti-Semitism of the Holocaust. Their research led them to draw very di˜ erent conclusions from Milgram’s. They believed that a high level of obedience was basically a psychological disorder (i.e. pathological). They believed that the causes of such a disorder lie in the personality of the individual rather than in the situation, i.e. it is a dispositional explanation. 
Authoritarian Personality and obedience 
Adorno et al. argued that people with an Authoritarian Personality (AP) ÿ rst of all show an extreme respect for (and submissiveness to) authority. Second, such people view society as ‘weaker’ than it once was, so believe we need strong and powerful leaders to enforce traditional values such as love of country and family. Both of these characteristics make people with an Authoritarian Personality more likely to obey orders from a source of authority. 
People with Authoritarian Personalities also show contempt for those of inferior social status. This is fuelled by their in. exible outlook on the world – for them there are no ‘grey areas’. Everything is either right or wrong and they are very uncomfortable with uncertainty. Therefore people who are ‘other’ (e.g. belong to a di˜ erent ethnic group) are responsible for the ills of society. ‘Other’ people are a convenient target for authoritarians who are likely to obey orders from authority ÿ gures even when such orders are destructive (as in Nazi Germany). 
Origins of the Authoritarian Personality 
Adorno et al. believed the Authoritarian Personality type forms in childhood, mostly as a result of harsh parenting. This parenting style typically features extremely strict discipline, an expectation of absolute loyalty, impossibly high standards and severe criticism of perceived failings. Parents give conditional love – that is, their love and a˜ ection for their child depends entirely on how he or she behaves (‘I will love you if ...’). 
Adorno et al. argued that these childhood experiences create resentment and hostility in a child. But the child cannot express these feelings directly against their parents because they fear punishment. So their fears are displaced onto others who they perceive to be weaker, in a process known as scapegoating. This explains the hatred towards people considered to be socially inferior or who belong to other social groups, a central feature of obedience to a higher authority. This is a psychodynamic explanation. 
Adorno et al.’s research 
Adorno et al. (1950) based their theory on research data. 
Procedure Adorno et al. (1950) studied more than 2000 middle-class, white Americans and their unconscious attitudes towards other ethnic groups. The researchers developed several measurement scales, including the potential-for-fascism scale (F-scale). This scale is still used to measure Authoritarian Personality. 
Two examples of items from the F-scale are: ‘Obedience and respect for authority are the most important virtues for children to learn’, and ‘There is hardly anything lower than a person who does not feel great love, gratitude and respect for his parents’. Other examples are given on the facing page. 
Findings People with authoritarian leanings (i.e. those who scored high on the F-scale and other measures) identiÿ ed with ‘strong’ people and were generally contemptuous of the ‘weak’. They were very conscious of status (their own and others’) and showed extreme respect, deference and servility to those of higher status – these traits are the basis of obedience. 
Adorno et al. also found that authoritarian people had a certain cognitive style (way of perceiving others) in which there was no ‘fuzziness’ between categories of people (i.e. ‘black and white’ thinking). They had ÿ xed and distinctive stereotypes about other groups. Adorno et al. found a strong positive correlation between authoritarianism and prejudice. 
Caleb’s grandad 
Caleb’s grandad is the old-fashioned type. As far as he’s concerned, there are good Zombies and there are bad Zombies and that’s all there is to it. He thinks the youth of today are a bunch of wasters and what they all need is a spell in the Zombie Army. He longs for the days when we had strong leaders who knew how to get things done. Caleb has also noticed that his grandad talks with a lot of respect about his old bosses from work: ‘They don’t make them like that anymore – you’d do anything for them.’ Caleb often wonders why his grandad thinks like this. 
Question 
From what you know about obedience, how would you explain to Caleb why his grandad has these attitudes? 

Resistance to social influence 
The specification says… 
Explanations of resistance to social influence, 
including social support and locus of control. 
Based on research covered in the previous spreads, you’d be forgiven for thinking that people are mostly puppets easily swayed by the forces of social pressure to conform or obey. But this is far from the truth. Even in Milgram’s studies, a healthy minority of participants refused to fully obey (35%). In Asch’s studies the most common behaviour was not conformity (most people did not conform most of the time). 
Key terms 
Resistance to social inf uence°Refers to the ability of people to withstand the social pressure to conform to the majority or to obey authority. This ability to withstand social pressure is inf uenced by both situational and dispositional factors. 
Social support°The presence of people who resist pressures to conform or obey can help others to do the same. These people act as models to show others that resistance to social inf uence is possible. 
Locus of control (LOC)°Refers to the sense we each have about what directs events in our lives. Internals believe they are mostly responsible for what happens to them (internal locus of control). Externals believe it is mainly a matter of luck or other outside forces (external locus of control). 
Under pressure 
You are a member of the student council at a sixth-form college. You are all meeting to elect a chairperson. The three candidates have all addressed the meeting and have now left. It’s decision time. But you begin to get a bit worried because the teacher who liaises with the student council is asking a lot of questions about one of the candidates. After a while, it becomes clear that he is trying to in˜ uence the students to vote for this person. 
Question 
What factors might make it difÿ cult for you to resist the pressure from the teacher to vote a certain way? 
Social support 
Resisting conformity 
The pressure to conform can be resisted if there are other people present who are not conforming. As we saw in Solomon Asch’s research (see page 16), the confederate who is not conforming may not be giving the ‘right’ answer. 
Simply the fact that someone else is not following the majority is social support. It enables the naïve participant to be free to follow their own conscience. The confederate acts as a ‘model’ of independent behaviour. Their dissent gives rise to more dissent because it shows that the majority is no longer unanimous. 
Resisting obedience 
The pressure to obey can be resisted if there is another person who is seen to disobey. In one of Milgram’s variations, the rate of obedience dropped from 65% to 10% when the genuine participant was joined by a disobedient confederate. The participant may not follow the disobedient person’s behaviour but the point is the other person’s disobedience acts as a ‘model’ of dissent for the participant to copy and this frees him to act from his own conscience. The disobedient model challenges the legitimacy of the authority ÿ gure, making it easier for others to disobey. 
Locus of control 
Julian Rotter (1966) proposed locus of control (LOC) as a concept concerned with internal control versus external control. Some people have an internal LOC (internals) – they believe that the things that happen to them are largely controlled by themselves. For example, if you do well in an exam it is because you worked hard, if you don’t do well it is because you didn’t work hard. 
Some people have an external LOC (externals) – they tend to believe the things that happen are outside their control. So if they did well in an exam it was because they used an excellent textbook (ours, obviously). If they failed they might blame it on the textbook (not ours) or they had bad luck because the questions were hard. 
The LOC continuum 
People are not just either internal or external. LOC is a scale and individuals vary in their position on it. So, high internal LOC is at one end of the continuum and high external at the other. Low internal and low external lie in-between. 
Resistance to social inf uence 
People with a high internal LOC are more able to resist pressures to conform or obey. If a person takes personal responsibility for their actions and experiences (as internals do), they tend to base their decisions on their own beliefs rather than depending on the opinions of others. 
Another explanation is that people with a high internal LOC tend to be more self­conÿ dent, more achievement-oriented and have higher intelligence. These traits lead to greater resistance to social in˜ uence. These are also characteristics of leaders, who have much less need for social approval than followers. 
Locus of control in action 
Asgarth and Hyacinth are students at Rydell High. They have very different outlooks on life. Asgarth believes you have to grasp opportunities with both hands because your fate is under your own control. That is why he has put his name forward to be his tutor group’s representative on the school council. Hyacinth, on the other hand, thinks that ‘what will be will be’ and there’s very little she can do to change that. She is also standing as tutor group rep, but she thinks it’s just down to luck whether she wins or loses. 
Questions 
1. 
Identify Asgarth’s and Hyacinth’s locus of control. 

2. 
Whoever wins the election is likely to come under pressure to conform or obey. Will Asgarth or Hyacinth be better able to resist social in˜ uence? Explain your choice. 









Minorityinfluence 
The specification says… 
Minority influence including reference to 
consistency, commitment and flexibility. 

We’ve said quite a lot so far about how majorities apply (real or imagined) pressure to others in their group. But if this is the only pressure that is felt, how does change come about? Where do new ideas come from? Serge Moscovici was the frst to identify the process of minority infuence as a contrast to majority infuence. He introduced the idea of minority infuence to explain innovation – new ways of doing things. 
Key terms 

Minority infuence°A form of social infuence in which a minority of people (sometimes just one person) persuades others to adopt their beliefs, attitudes or behaviours. Leads to internalisation or conversion, in which private attitudes are changed as well as public behaviours. 
Consistency°Minority infuence is most e.ective if the minority keeps the same beliefs, both over time and between all the individuals that form the minority. Consistency is e.ective because it draws attention to the minority view. 
Commitment°Minority infuence is more powerful if the minority demonstrates dedication to their position, for example, by making personal sacrifces. This is e.ective because it shows the minority is not acting out of self-interest. 
Flexibility°Relentless consistency could be counter-productive if it is seen by the majority as unbending and unreasonable. Therefore minority infuence is more e.ective if the minority show fexibility by accepting the possibility of compromise. 




mean? (2˜marks) 
Evaluation 
Research support for consistency 
One strength is research evidence demonstrating the importance of consistency. 
Moscovici et al.’s blue/green slide study (see facing page) showed that a consistent minority opinion had a greater eff ect on changing the views of other people than an inconsistent opinion. Wendy Wood et al. (1994) carried out a meta-analysis of almost 100 similar studies and found that minorities who were seen as being consistent were most infl uential. 
This suggests that presenting a consistent view is a minimum requirement for a minority trying to infl uence a majority. 
Research support for deeper processing 
Another strength is evidence showing that a change in the majority’s position does involve deeper processing of the minority’s ideas. 
Robin Martin et al. (2003) presented a message supporting a particular viewpoint and measured participants’ agreement. One group of participants then heard a minority group agree with the initial view while another group heard a majority group agree with it. Participants were fi nally exposed to a confl icting view and attitudes were measured again. People were less willing to change their opinions if they had listened to a minority group than if they had listened to a majority group. 
This suggests that the minority message had been more deeply processed and had a more enduring eff ect, supporting the central argument about how minority infl uence works. 
Counterpoint Research studies such as Martin et al.’s make clear distinctions between the majority and the minority. Doing this in a controlled way is a strength of minority infl uence research. But real-world social infl uence situations are much more complicated. For example, majorities usually have a lot more power and status than minorities. Minorities are very committed to their causes – they have to be because they oft en face very hostile opposition. These features are usually absent from minority infl uence research – the minority is simply the smallest group. 
Therefore Martin et al.’s fi ndings are very limited in what they can tell us about minority infl uence in real-world situations. 
Artif cial tasks 
One limitation of minority infl uence research is that the tasks involved are oft en just as artifi cial as Asch’s line judgement task. 
This includes Moscovici et al.’s task of identifying the colour of a slide. Research is therefore far removed from how minorities attempt to change the behaviour of majorities in real life. In cases such as jury decision-making and political campaigning, the outcomes are vastly more important, sometimes even literally a matter of life or death. 
This means fi ndings of minority infl uence studies are lacking in external validity and are limited in what they can tell us about how minority infl uence works in real-world social situations. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Power of minority inf uence 
In Moscovici et al.’s study, the fi gure for agreement with a consistent minority was very low, on average only 8%. This suggests that minority infl uence is quite rare and not a useful concept. 
But when participants wrote down their answers privately, they were more likely to agree with the minority view. This suggests that the view expressed by people in public was just the ‘tip of the iceberg’. 
Consider: On the basis of these two ÿ ndings, is minority in. uence a valid form of social in. uence? 
Being in a minority in the real world can be dangerous. But even a minority of one can be persuasive if he or she is consistent, committed to the cause and fl exible. Maybe it wouldn’t work in a tug-of-war, though? 
Recycling 
There was a time in this country when very few people recycled cans, bottles, newspapers and the like. In fact, people who did were viewed by the majority with suspicion, as anyone who carried out such ‘green’ activities was often considered ‘a bit strange’. 
Question 
How did the minority activity of recycling become so widely accepted by the majority? (Include all of the features of minority in˜ uence in your answer.) 
A jury decides 
Psychologists have discovered that minority in˜ uence can be an important social in˜ uence process in jury decision-making. Let’s say that a jury of 12 people has to decide on the guilt or innocence of a defendant charged with murder. A vote is taken at the start of the jury’s deliberations – 11 believe the defendant is guilty. Only one person is convinced of his innocence. Because the jury has to reach a unanimous decision, the discussion begins. After several hours, another vote is taken. This time, all 12 jurors believe the defendant is not guilty. 
Question 
Using what you know about minority in˜ uence, explain how this change of opinion could have happened. 
Study tip 
Research studies can serve two purposes. You can use them when asked to describe research or you can use them as part of any evaluation/discussion. 
The key issue is the description of what the researchers did (the procedure). This is creditworthy material in a descriptive question but not when using the study for evaluation – in this case you should just focus on what the study has demonstrated, i.e. what it ‘shows’ (the f ndings and/or conclusions). 
Check it 
1. 
Explain what is meant by ‘minority in˜ uence’.  [2 marks] 

2. 
Brie˜ y explain what is meant by ‘consistency, commitment and ˜ exibility’ as factors that enable a minority to in˜ uence a majority. [3 marks] 

3. 
Describe and evaluate research into minority in˜ uence. 


[12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 
 Minority influence // 33 
Social influence and social change 
The specification says… 
The role of social influence processes in social 
change. 
Serge Moscovici’s research into minority inf uence rejuvenated the study of social inf uence because it gave psychologists a new and exciting direction. They started investigating how major changes in behaviour occurred on the level of whole societies, and not just as a result of minority inf uence but other forms of social inf uence as well. This spread presents the ultimate practical application of such psychological knowledge. 
Key terms 
Social inf uence°The process by which individuals and groups change each other’s attitudes and behaviours. Includes conformity, obedience and minority inf uence. 
Social change°This occurs when whole societies, rather than just individuals, adopt new attitudes, beliefs and ways of doing things. Examples include accepting that the Earth orbits the Sun, women’s su° rage, gay rights and environmental issues. 
Tackling obesity 
Everyone agrees that Britain is in an obesity crisis – 65% of men and 58% of women are now overweight or obese. Heart disease, certain cancers and especially type 2 diabetes are all on the increase, costing the NHS billions of pounds every year. 
Experts agree that any improvement in the situation is going to require signiÿ cant changes in attitudes and behaviours across the whole of society. 
Question 
You have been asked to advise a government department worried about the developing obesity crisis. Using your knowledge of how both 
(a) conformity and (b) obedience processes can in° uence social change, explain what advice you would give the government. Make sure you refer to social in° uence research in your advice. 
Social change 
Lessons from minority inf uence research 
Let’s consider the steps in how minority social in˜ uence creates social change by looking at a real-world example – the African-American civil rights movement of the 1950s and 60s. 
(1) 
Drawing attention through social proof – In the 1950s, black and white segregation applied to all parts of America. There were black neighbourhoods and, in the southern states of America, places such as certain schools and restaurants were exclusive to whites. The civil rights marches of this period drew attention to this situation, providing social proof of the problem. 

(2) 
Consistency – Civil rights activists represented a minority of the American population, but their position remained consistent. Millions of people took part in many marches over several years, always presenting the same non-aggressive messages. 

(3)
 Deeper processing of the issue – The activism meant that many people who had simply accepted the status quo began to think deeply about the unjustness of it. 

(4)
 The augmentation principle – Individuals risked their lives numerous times. For example the ‘freedom riders’ were mixed ethnic groups who boarded buses in the south, challenging racial segregation of transport. Many freedom riders were beaten. This personal risk indicates a strong belief and reinforces (or augments) their message. 

(5)
 The snowball e˜ ect – Activists (e.g. Martin Luther King) gradually got the attention of the US government. More and more people backed the minority position. In 1964 the US Civil Rights Act prohibited discrimination, marking a change from minority to majority support for civil rights. 

(6) 
Social cryptomnesia (people have a memory that change has occurred but don’t remember how it happened) – Social change clearly did come about so the south is quite a di˜ erent place now. But some people have no memory (cryptoamnesia) of the events that led to that change. 


Lessons from conformity research 
Earlier in this chapter you read about Solomon Asch’s research. He highlighted the importance of dissent in one of his variations in which one confederate gave correct answers throughout the procedure. This broke the power of the majority, encouraging others to do likewise. Such dissent has the potential to ultimately lead to social change. 
A di˜ erent approach is one used by environmental and health campaigns which exploit conformity processes by appealing to normative social in° uence. They do this by providing information about what other people are doing. Examples include reducing litter by printing normative messages on litter bins (‘Bin it – others do’), and preventing young people from taking up smoking (telling them that most other young people do not smoke). In other words social change is encouraged by drawing attention to what the majority are actually doing. 
Lessons from obedience research 
Stanley Milgram’s research clearly demonstrates the importance of disobedient role models. In the variation where a confederate Teacher refuses to give shocks to the Learner, the rate of obedience in the genuine participants plummeted. 
Philip Zimbardo (2007) suggested how obedience can be used to create social change through the process of gradual commitment. Once a small instruction is obeyed, it becomes much more diÿ  cult to resist a bigger one. People essentially ‘dri. ’ into a new kind of behaviour. 
Minority inf uence and social change 
There are many examples of how minority in° uence has led to social change. Just a few are: how opinion changed from believing the world is ° at to accepting it is round, suffragists and suffragettes campaigning for the vote for women, changing attitudes towards waste disposal (the green movement) and changing attitudes about smoking. 
Question 
Choose one (or more) of these examples. Describe how the six-step process of minority in° uence (outlined above) can explain the social change you have selected. 
















































Practical corner 

















A high LOC score is external. A high social influence score reflects high obedience/conformity. 
36 //  Chapter 1 Social influence 
1. A sample set of data is given in Table 1. Draw a scattergram of the results. Remember to plot 
the pairs of scores precisely and label your axes carefully. (3 marks) 
2. 
What kind of correlation does this scattergram show? Explain your answer. (2 marks) 

3. 
Explain why the median would be the most suitable measure of central tendency. (2 marks) 

4. 
Calculate the median for each variable. (1 mark) 

5. 
Calculate the range for each variable. (1 mark) 

6. 
Based on your analysis, what conclusion could you draw about the relationship between locus of control and susceptibility to social in˜uence? (2 marks) 

7. 
Do these ÿndings support previous research into this relationship? Explain your answer. (2 marks) 



7. Explain what the qualitative data tells us about the reasons the interviewees gave for donating blood. (2˜marks) 
Table 2 A set of example data. 
Participant  Compliance  Identifi cation  Internalisation  Obedience  
1  2  3  2  0  
2  4  1  2  2  
3  1  0  3  0  
4  0  2  0  3  
5  0  3  2  0  
6  2  1  1  0  
7  5  4  4  3  
8  1  2  3  1  











 Practical corner // 37 
Revision summaries 



Judging the lengths of lines. Conformity is yielding to group pressures. Behaviour related to social roles and norms. 
Asch’s research Types Zimbardo’s research 
Baseline procedure 
123 men judged line lengths. Confederates deliberately gave wrong answers. 
Findings 
Naïve participants conformed on 36.8% of trials. 25% never conformed. 
Variations Group size 
Asch varied group size from two to 16. Conformity increased up to three, then levelled off. 
Unanimity 
Asch placed a dissenter (confederate) in the group. Conformity rate reduced. 
Task di.culty 
Asch made line lengths more similar. Conformity increased when task was harder (ISI). 
Evaluation 
Artificial situation and task 
Participants knew this was a study so they just played along with a trivial task (demand characteristics). 
Limited application 
Asch’s research only conducted on American men. 
Research support 
Lucas et al. found more conformity when maths problems 
were harder. Counterpoint – conformity more complex, confident participants were less conforming (individual factor). 
Evaluation extra: Ethical issues 
Research may help avoid mindless conformity, but participants were deceived. 
Internalisation 
Private and public acceptance of group norms. 
Identifi cation 
Change behaviour to be part of a group we identify with, may change privately too. 
Compliance 
Go along with group publicly but no private change. 
Explanations 
Informational social influence (ISI) 
Conform to be right. Assume group knows better than us. 
Normative social influence (NSI) 
Conform to be liked or accepted by group. 
Evaluation 
Research support for NSI 
When no normative group pressure (wrote answers), conformity down to 12.5% (Asch). 
Research support for ISI 
Participants relied on other people’s answers to hard 
maths problems (Lucas et al.). Counterpoint – cannot usually separate ISI and NSI, a dissenter may reduce power of NSI or ISI. 
Individual di.erences in NSI 
nAffiliators want to be liked more, so conform more (McGhee and Teevan). 
Evaluation extra: Is the NSI/ISI distinction useful? 
NSI/ISI distinction may not be useful but Asch’s research supports both. 
The Stanford prison experiment (SPE) 
Mock prison with 21 student volunteers, randomly assigned as 
guards or prisoners. Conformity to social roles created through uniforms (e.g. loose smocks, carrying wooden club) and instructions about behaviour (e.g. guards have power). 
Findings related to social roles 
Guards became increasingly brutal, prisoners’ rebellion put down and prisoners became depressed. Study stopped after 6 days. 
Conclusions related to social roles 
Participants strongly conformed to their social roles. 
Evaluation 
Control 
Random assignment to roles increased internal validity. 
Lack of realism 
Participants play-acted their roles according to media-derived 
stereotypes (Banuazizi and Movahedi). Counterpoint – evidence that prisoners thought the prison was real to them e.g. 90% of conversations about prison (McDermott). 
Exaggerates the power of roles 
Only one-third of guards were brutal so conclusions exaggerated (Fromm). 
Evaluation extra: Alternative explanation 
Social identity theory suggests taking on roles due to active identification, not automatic (Haslam and Reicher). 



Minority in˜uence leads to conversion and internalisation. 
Research Evaluation 
Consistency Research support for consistency 
If the minority is consistent (synchronic Moscovici’s blue-green slides and Wood or diachronic) this attracts the attention et al.’s meta-analysis. of the majority over time. 
Research support for deeper processing Commitment Participants exposed to minority view Personal sacrifices show commitment, resisted conflicting view (Martin et al.). attract attention, reinforce message 
Counterpoint – real-world majorities (augmentation). 
have more power/status than minorities, missing from research. 
Flexibility Minority more convincing if they accept Artificial tasks some counterarguments. 
Tasks often trivial so tell us little about real-world influence. 
Explaining the process of change The three factors make majority think Evaluation extra: Power of minority more deeply about an issue. infl uence Snowball effect – minority view gathers More people agree with minority in force and becomes majority influence. private. 




Were Germans different? Pressures in the situation. 


Baseline procedure 
American men gave fake electric shocks to a ‘Learner’ in response to instructions (prods) from an ‘Experimenter’. 
Baseline findings 
65% gave highest shock of 450 V. 100% gave shocks up to 300 V. Many showed signs of anxiety e.g. 
sweating. 
Evaluation 
Research support 
French TV documentary/game show found 80% gave maximum shock, plus similar behaviour to Milgram’s participants (Beauvois et al.). 
Low internal validity 
Participants realised shocks were fake, so ‘play-acting’ (Orne and Holland). Supported by Perry – tapes of participants showed only 50% believed shocks real. 
Counterpoint – participants did give real shocks to a puppy (Sheridan and King). 
Alternative interpretation of fi ndings 
Haslam et al. found participants didn’t obey Prod 4. Participants identified with scientific aims (social identity) – not blind obedience. 
Evaluation extra: Ethical issues 
Deception meant participants could not properly consent (Baumrind). May be balanced by benefits of the research. 
Proximity 
Obedience 40% with T and L in same room, 30% for touch proximity. 
Psychological distance affects obedience. 
Location 
Obedience 47.5% in run-down office building. University’s prestige gave authority. 
Uniform 
Obedience 20% when Experimenter 
was ‘member of the public’. Uniform is symbol of legitimate authority. 
Evaluation 
Research support 
Bickman showed power of uniform in field experiment. 
Cross-cultural replications 
Dutch participants ordered to say stressful things to interviewee, decreased proximity led to decreased obedience (Meeus and Raaijmakers). 
Counterpoint – but most studies in countries similar to US, so not generalisable (Smith and Bond). 
Low internal validity 
Some of Milgram’s procedures in the variations were especially contrived, so not genuine obedience (Orne and Holland). 
Evaluation extra: The danger of the situational perspective 
Gives obedience alibi for destructive behaviour (Mandel). 
The dynamics of social hierarchies. 
Agentic state 
Acting as an agent of another person. 
Autonomous state 
Free to act according to conscience. Switching between the two – agentic shift. 
Binding factors 
Allow individual to ignore the damaging effects of their obedient behaviour, reducing moral strain. 
Evaluation 
Research support 
Milgram’s resistant participants continued giving shocks when Experimenter took responsibility. 
A limited explanation 
Cannot explain why Rank and Jacobson’s nurses and some of Milgram’s participants disobeyed. 
Evaluation extra: Obedience alibi revisited 
Police Battalion 101 behaved autonomously but destructively (Mandel). 
Legitimacy of authority 
Legitimacy of authority 
Created by hierarchical nature of society. Some people entitled to expect obedience. Learned in childhood. 
Destructive authority 
Problems arise when used destructively (e.g. Hitler). 
Evaluation 
Explains cultural di.erences 
In Australia 16% obeyed (Kilham and Mann) but 85% in Germany (Mantell), related to structure of society. 
Cannot explain all (dis)obedience 
Rank and Jacobson’s nurses in hierarchical structure but did not obey legitimate authority. 
Personality factors in the individual. 
The Authoritarian Personality (AP) 
AP and obedience 
Adorno et al. described AP as extreme 
respect for authority and submissiveness 
to it, contempt for inferiors. 
Origins of AP 
Harsh parenting creates hostility that 
cannot be expressed against parents so 
is displaced onto scapegoats. 
Adorno et al.’s research: Procedure 
Used F-scale to study unconscious 
attitudes towards other ethnic groups. 
Findings 
APs identify with ‘strong’ people, 
have  fixed cognitive style, and hold 
stereotypes and prejudices. 
Evaluation 
Research support 
Obedient participants had high F-scores 
(Elms and Milgram). 
Counterpoint – but obedient 
participants also unlike authoritarians in 
many ways, complex. 
Limited explanation 
Can’t explain obedience across a whole 
culture (social identity theory is better). 
Political bias 
Authoritarianism equated with 
right-wing ideology, ignores left-wing 
authoritarianism (Christie and Jahoda). 
Evaluation extra: Flawed evidence 
F-scale is basis of AP explanation, but 
has flaws (e.g. response bias) and so not 
useful (Greenstein). 


Social support 
Resisting conformity 
Conformity reduced by presence of dissenters from the group – even wrong answer breaks unanimity of majority (Asch). 
Resisting obedience 
Obedience decreases in presence of disobedient peer who acts as a model to follow – challenges legitimacy of authority figure. Obedience dropped from 65% to 10% (Milgram). 


Explaining when people disobey and resist the pressure to conform. 
Evaluation 
Real-world research support 
Having a ‘buddy’ helps resist peer pressure to smoke (Albrecht et al.). 
Research support for dissenting peers 
Obedience to an order from oil company fell when participants in a group (Gamson et al.). 
Evaluation extra: Social support explanation 
Resistance lower (36% versus 64%) when confederate had poor eyesight (Allen and Levine). 
Locus of control 
Locus of control (LOC) 
LOC is sense of what directs events in our lives – internal or external source (Rotter). 
The LOC continuum 
High internal at one end and high external at the other. 
Resistance to social influence 
Internals can resist social influence, more confident, less need for approval. 
Evaluation 
Research support 
Internals less likely to fully obey in Milgram-type procedure (Holland). 
Contradictory research 
People now more independent but also more external (Twenge et al.). 
Evaluation extra: Limited role of LOC 
Role of LOC only applies to new situations (Rotter). 

 Revision summaries // 39 
Practice questions, answers and feedback 

On this spread we look at some typical student answers to questions. The comments provided indicate what is good and bad in each answer. Learning how to produce effective question answers is a SKILL. Read pages 213 223 for guidance. 
 Practice questions, answers and feedback // 41 
’’ ’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
‘’ ‘’ ‘’ ‘’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’’ 
’ 
 Multiple-choice questions // 43 



Chapter 2 Memory 
Can you remember… 


Contents 

Coding, capacity and duration of memory 46 The multi-store model of memory 48 Types of long-term memory 50 The working memory model 52 Explanations for forgetting: Interference 54 Retrieval failure 56 Factors a˜ecting the accuracy of eyewitness testimony: Misleading information 58 Anxiety 60 

Coding, capacity and duration of memory 
The specification says… 
Short-term memory and long-term memory. Features of each store: coding, capacity and duration. 

Our everyday experience of memory is that there are two main types. Some are brief and quickly forgotten, but others can last a very long time indeed. Psychologists broadly agree, and have investigated in great detail three main features of what they call short term memory (STM) and long term memory (LTM). 
Key terms 

Short-term memory (STM) The limited-capacity memory store. In STM, coding is mainly acoustic (sounds), capacity is between 5 and 9 items on average, duration is about 18 seconds. 
Long-term memory (LTM) The permanent memory store. In LTM, coding is mainly semantic (meaning), it has unlimited capacity and can store memories for up to a lifetime. 
Coding˜ The format in which information is stored in the various memory stores. 
Capacity˜The amount of information that can be held in a memory store. 
Duration˜The length of time information can be held in memory. 

Peterson and Peterson 
Some psychology students tried the technique 
used by Peterson and Peterson to assess the 
duration of short-term memory. Their results 
are shown in the graph below. 
100 


75 
50 
25 

% of correct responses 


0 
3 6 9 121518 
Retention interval (seconds) 
1. 
Estimate the percentage of correct responses at each retention interval using the graph above. Place your answers in a table. (3 marks) 

2. 
The results shown above are almost identical to Peterson and Peterson’s results. What can you 





Evaluation 
Separate memory stores 

One strength of Baddeley’s study is that it identified a clear difference between two memory stores. 
Later research showed that there are some exceptions to Baddeley’s findings. But the idea that STM uses mostly acoustic coding and LTM mostly semantic has stood the test of time. 
This was an important step in our understanding of the memory system, which led to the multi-store model (see next spread). 
Artifcial stimuli 

One limitation of Baddeley’s study was that it used quite artificial stimuli rather than meaningful material. 
For example, the word lists had no personal meaning to participants. So Baddeley’s findings may not tell us much about coding in different kinds of memory tasks, especially in everyday life. When processing more meaningful information, people may use semantic coding even for STM tasks. 
This suggests that the findings from this study have limited application. 
Evaluation 
A valid study 
One strength of Jacobs’ study is that it has been replicated. 

The study is a very old one and early research in psychology often lacked adequate controls. For example, some participants’ digit spans might have been underestimated because they were distracted during testing (confounding variable). Despite this, Jacobs’ findings have been confirmed by other, better controlled studies since (e.g. Bopp and Verhaeghen 2005). 
This suggests that Jacobs’ study is a valid test of digit span in STM. 
Not so many chunks 

One limitation of Miller’s research is that he may have overestimated STM capacity. 
Nelson Cowan (2001) reviewed other research and concluded that the capacity of STM is only about 4 (plus or minus 1) chunks. 
This suggests that the lower end of Miller’s estimate (five items) is more appropriate than seven items. 
Evaluation 
Meaningless stimuli in STM study 

One limitation of Peterson and Peterson’s study is that the stimulus material was artificial. 
The study is not completely irrelevant because we do sometimes try to remember fairly meaningless material (e.g. phone numbers). Even so, recalling consonant syllables does not reflect most everyday memory activities where what we are trying to remember is meaningful. 
This means the study lacked external validity. 
High external validity 

One strength of Bahrick et al.’s study is that it has high external validity. 
This is because the researchers investigated meaningful memories (i.e. of people’s names and faces). When studies on LTM were conducted with meaningless pictures to be remembered, recall rates were lower (e.g. Shepard 1967). 
This suggests that Bahrick et al.’s findings reflect a more ‘real’ estimate of the duration of LTM. 
Chunking in STM 

Have a quick read of the following letters, look away and try to recall them in the same order: Y E B N O I P D T A L G R C U Try the same thing with this list: D A T N O L P I B R E Y C U G And, ÿnally, try again with this list: C A R D O G L I T P E N B U Y 
Question 
Use your knowledge of the capacity of STM to explain why one of these lists is easier to recall than the others. 
Pelmanism A great card game – try it! You shuffle the cards and put them face down on the table. The first player turns two cards over. If the cards match, the player keeps them and has another go. If the cards don t match, they are turned back over and both players have to try to remember where they are for their next turn. It is a test of STM capacity and duration. 
Study tip 
If asked to describe a study, always try to include information about what the researchers did (the procedure) and what they found (the fndings or results). You can also include conclusions as part of the fndings. BUT, if you are asked to describe what a researcher did then only describe the procedure, and if you are asked what a study showed, then only include fndings/ conclusions. 
Check it 

1. 
Explain what is meant by ‘duration’ of short-term memory. [1 mark] 

2. 
Explain what is meant by ‘coding’ in long-term memory. 


[1 mark] 
3. Outline the difference between the duration of short-term memory and the duration of long-term memory. 

[4 marks] 
4. Outline and evaluate research related to the features of short-term memory (coding, capacity and duration). 
[12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 
 Coding, capacity and duration of memory // 47 

The multi-store model of memory 
The specification says… 
The multi-store model of memory: sensory 
register, short-term memory and long-term 
memory. Features of each store: coding, 
capacity and duration. 

Psychologists have produced many theories/ models of memory to represent and explain how our memories work. The specifcation includes two of these models of memory. On this spread we look at the frst of these, the multi store model. 
This model is based on the features of STM and LTM as well as a third store, the sensory register. 
Key terms 

Multi-store model (MSM) A representation of how memory works in terms of three stores called the sensory register, short-term memory (STM) and long-term memory (LTM). It also describes how information is transferred from one store to another, what makes some memories last and what makes some memories disappear. 
Sensory register˜The memory stores for each of our fve senses, such as vision (iconic store) and hearing (echoic store). Coding in the iconic sensory register is visual and in the echoic sensory register it is acoustic (sounds). The capacity of sensory registers is huge (millions of receptors) and information lasts for a very short time (less than half a second). 
Frontal lobe 
Hippocampus 

There is a hippocampus on 
both sides (hemispheres) of the brain. The hippocampus has been shown to play a major role in memory. 
Study tip 
You can use the case 




study of HM as a point of evaluation for the MSM 
– it provides supporting evidence. 

You can also evaluate Case studies of individuals with memory disorders the methodology used have provided some useful evidence relating to the (it was a unique case multi-store model. One of them has become especially study of a brain-damaged well known – the case of a man referred to by his individual). However, such initials, HM (Henry Molaison). 
methodological evaluations are only creditworthy if HM underwent brain surgery to relieve his epilepsy. they are explicitly linked Unfortunately for him, the procedure used was in its to the MSM, e.g. you say infancy and not fully understood. Crucially, a part of ‘therefore this case study his brain known as the hippocampus was removed does not o.er good support from both sides of his brain. We now know this to be for the MSM’. central to memory function. When his memory was assessed in 1955, he thought the year was 1953, and 
that he was 27 years old (he was actually 31). He had very little recall of the operation. 
He could not form new long-term memories. For example, he would read the same magazine repeatedly without remembering it. He couldn’t recall what he had eaten earlier the same day. However, despite all this, he performed well on tests of immediate memory span, a measure of STM. 
Question 
The case of HM is usually taken to support the multi-store model. Can you explain why? 
Evaluation 
Research support 

One strength of the MSM is support from studies showing that STM and LTM are diff erent. 
For example, Alan Baddeley (1966, see previous spread) found that we tend to mix up words that sound similar when we are using our STMs. But we mix up words that have similar meanings when we use our LTMs. Further support comes from the studies of capacity and duration we encountered in the previous spread. 
These studies clearly show that STM and LTM are separate and independent memory stores, as claimed by the MSM. 
Counterpoint Despite such apparent support, in everyday life 
we form memories related to all sorts of useful things – people’s 
faces, their names, facts, places, etc. But many of the studies that 
support the MSM used none of these materials. Instead, they used 
digits, letters (Jacobs), and sometimes words (Baddeley). They 

even used what are known as consonant syllables that have no 
meaning (Peterson and Peterson). 

This means that the MSM may not be a valid model of how 
memory works in our everyday lives where we have to remember 
much more meaningful information. 
More than one STM store 

One limitation of the MSM is evidence of more than one STM store. 
Tim Shallice and Elizabeth Warrington (1970) studied a client they referred to as KF who had a clinical memory disorder called amnesia. KF’s STM for digits was very poor when they were read out loud to him. But his recall was much better when he read the digits to himself. Further studies of KF (and others) showed that there could even be another short-term store for non-verbal sounds (e.g. noises). 
This evidence suggests that the MSM is wrong in claiming that there is just one STM store processing diff erent types of information 
(e.g. visual, auditory, etc.). 
Elaborative rehearsal 
Another limitation of the MSM is that prolonged rehearsal is not needed for transfer to LTM. 

According to the MSM, what matters about rehearsal is the amount of it – the more you rehearse something, the more likely it is to transfer to LTM. This is prolonged rehearsal. But Fergus Craik and Michael Watkins (1973) found that the type of rehearsal is more important than the amount. Elaborative rehearsal is needed for long-term storage. This occurs when you link the information to your existing knowledge, or you think about what it means. This means that information can be transferred to LTM without prolonged rehearsal. 
This suggests that the MSM does not fully explain how long-term storage is achieved. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Bygone model 
Atkinson and Shiff rin based the MSM on the research evidence 
available at the time that showed STM and LTM to be single 
memory stores, separate and independent from each other. 
However, there is a lot of research evidence that LTM, like 
STM, is not a single memory store. For example, we have one 
long-term store for our memories of facts about the world, 
and we have a diff erent one for our memories of how to ride 
a bicycle. Combined with research showing there is more than 
one type of STM and more than one type of rehearsal, the 
MSM is an oversimplifi ed model of memory. 
Consider: Does this mean the MSM is worthless and should be abandoned? 

Duration of the sensory register 
Evidence to support the limited duration of the sensory registers (SRs) was collected in a study by George Sperling (1960), testing the iconic sensory register (memory store). Participants saw a grid of digits and letters (see below) 
for 50 milliseconds.  
They were either asked to write down all 12  Table showing stimulus  
items or they were told they would hear a tone  material used by Sperling.  
immediately after the exposure and they should just write down the row indicated (top, middle,  7  1  V  F  
bottom). When asked to report the whole thing  X  L  5  3  
their recall was poorer (ÿ ve items recalled, about 42%) than when asked to give one row only  B  4  W  7 
(three items recalled, 75%).  
Questions  

1. 
Explain why the ÿ ndings of Sperling’s study show that information decays rapidly in the iconic sensory register. 


2. 
Explain why the sensory registers have such a very large capacity and brief duration. 


This well-known effect from Bonfi re Night depends on your iconic memory store, one of the memory stores of the multi-store model. You can write your name in the air with one sparkler because an afterimage persists on the retina for approximately one twenty-fi fth of a second after the stimulus has moved on. This is called persistence of vision. 
Duration of STM 

An experiment was carried out to investigate the duration of STM. Two groups of participants were given a list of words to learn. Both groups were given 30 seconds to do this. One group (Group A) then had to recall as many words as they could after a 6-second delay. The other group (Group B) was given a 20-second delay. 
Questions 

1. 
Identify the independent and dependent variables in this study. (2 marks) 

2. 
Identify the experimental design used in this study. (1 mark) 

3. 
Explain one limitation of this type of design in this study. (2 marks) 

4. 
The researcher wanted to ÿ nd the average number of words recalled for each group. What would be the most appropriate measure to use? Justify your answer. (2 marks) 

5. 
The experimenter found that Group B recalled fewer words than Group A. Does this support the MSM? Explain why or why not. (3 marks) 



Check it 

1. 
Outline what research has shown about long-term memory according to the multi-store model of memory. [6 marks] 

2. 
Outline two limitations of the multi-store model of memory. 


[4 marks] 
3. Discuss the multi-store model of memory. 

[12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 
 The multi-store model of memory // 49 

Types of long-term memory 












Participant  Episodic memory score  Semantic memory score  
1  6  9  
2  3  7  
3  5  7  
4  6  8  
5  4  10  



The working memory model 
The specification says… 
The working memory model: central executive, phonological loop, visuo-spatial sketchpad and episodic buffer. Features of the model: coding and capacity. 


One of the limitations of the multi store model (see page 48) is the fact that the stores were described as single units. On the previous spread we saw that long term memory can be subdivided. Research has also shown that short term (working) memory has qualitatively di.erent subdivisions. Alan Baddeley and Graham Hitch (1974) developed a model of short term memory to account for this research. 
Key terms 


Working memory model (WMM) A representation of short-term memory (STM). It suggests that STM is a dynamic processor of di.erent types of information using subunits co-ordinated by a central decision-making system. 
Central executive (CE) The component of the WMM that co-ordinates the activities of the three subsystems in memory. It also allocates processing resources to those activities. 
Phonological loop (PL) The component of the WMM that processes information in terms of sound. This includes both written and spoken material. It’s divided into the phonological store and the articulatory process. 
Visuo-spatial sketchpad (VSS) The component of the WMM that processes visual and spatial information in a mental space often called our ‘inner eye’. 
Episodic bu. er (EB) The component of the WMM that brings together material from the other subsystems into a single memory rather than separate strands. It also provides a bridge between working memory and long-term memory. 

The PL contributes to our learning of the sounds of language (phonology). It accesses long term memory to store and retrieve information about language sounds. This allows us to develop our vocabulary as children and, in a foreign language, as adults. 
The VSS contributes to our understanding of ‘visual semantics’ – the meanings of objects in our visual environment. It can access LTM to store and retrieve visuo spatial information. For example, if someone says to us, ‘Think of something you sit on , we can easily retrieve an image of a chair or a sofa from LTM. 

Picture in your mind the capital letters J and D, side-by-side. At the moment they are the same size and colour. Now manipulate your images of these letters to form an object, let’s say an umbrella. You can change their size and orientation but not the letters themselves; they have to be capital J and capital D. You can colour them in mentally if you wish. 
Let’s try that again, this time with different elements. Imagine a square, a triangle and the capital letter H. Try and arrange these into an object, your choice this time. 
One more go: how about an oval, a triangle, the capital letter K and the lower case letter b? Oh, and a question mark? You might have noticed that it very soon becomes quite difÿcult and eventually impossible to mentally hold onto that much information. 
Question 
What do you think this tells us about working memory? What were you doing when you performed this task? 
Evaluation 
Clinical evidence 
One strength is support from Tim Shallice and Elizabeth Warrington’s (1970) case study of patient KF (see also page 49). 

Aft er his brain injury, KF had poor STM ability for auditory (sound) information but could process visual information normally. For instance his immediate recall of letters and digits was better when he read them (visual) than when they were read to him (acoustic). KF’s phonological loop was damaged but his visuo­spatial sketchpad was intact. 
This fi nding strongly supports the existence of separate visual and acoustic memory stores. 

Counterpoint However, it is unclear whether KF had other 
cognitive impairments (apart from damage to his phonological 
loop) which might have aff ected his performance on memory 
tasks. For example, his injury was caused by a motorcycle 

accident. The trauma involved may have aff ected his cognitive 
performance quite apart from any brain injury. 
This challenges evidence that comes from clinical studies 
of people with brain injuries that may have aff ected many 
diff erent systems. 
Dual-task performance 

Another strength is that studies of dual-task performance support the separate existence of the visuo-spatial sketchpad. 
When Baddeley et al.’s (1975) participants carried out a visual and verbal task at the same time (dual task), their performance on each was similar to when they carried out the tasks separately. But when both tasks were visual (or both were verbal), performance on both declined substantially. This is because both visual tasks compete for the same subsystem (VSS), whereas there is no competition when performing a verbal and visual task together. 
This shows there must be a separate subsystem (the VSS) that processes visual input (and one for verbal processing, the PL). 
Nature of the central executive 

One limitation is that there is a lack of clarity over the nature of the central executive. 
Baddeley (2003) himself recognised this when he said, ‘The central executive is the most important but the least understood component of working memory’. The CE needs to be more clearly specifi ed than just being simply ‘attention’. For example, some psychologists believe the CE may consist of separate subcomponents. 

This means that the CE is an unsatisfactory component and this challenges the integrity of the WMM. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Validity of the model 
We have seen that dual-task studies support the WMM because two tasks that share a subsystem are much harder to perform together than tasks that involve separate subsystems. Therefore, there must be separate components in working memory (e.g. VSS and PL). 

However, these studies use tasks that are very unlike the tasks we perform in our everyday lives (e.g. identifying the correct order of letters such as A and B, recalling random sequences of letters). They are also carried out in highly-controlled lab conditions (e.g. where presentation of stimuli is precisely timed). 
Consider: On balance, do dual-task studies support or challenge the working memory model? 

There is a very good reason why it is against the law to use your mobile phone and drive at the same time. Carrying out two tasks that use the same components of working memory can lead to poor performance on one or both of them. 
Dual-task performance 
Think about performing the following two tasks at the same time. You 
have to repeat a phone number over and over to yourself (maintenance 
rehearsal) while also answering a true or false quiz in a magazine. 
It turns out that most people can do this quite successfully. The multi-store 
model cannot explain this, but the working memory model can. 
Question 
How can you use the working memory model to explain what is happening? 
The word length effect 

A cognitive psychologist presented one group of participants with a list of short words to learn (e.g. torch, ear, sun). Other participants were given a list of longer words to learn (e.g. caravan, elephant, celery). She found that participants in the ÿ rst group were able to recall more words than participants in the second group. 
Questions 
1. 
Write a suitable hypothesis for this experiment. (2 marks) 

2. 
Is your hypothesis directional or non-directional? (1 mark) 

3. 
Identify one possible confounding variable and explain how it might affect the ÿ ndings of this study. (2 marks) 

4. 
Use your knowledge of the working memory model to explain the ÿ nding from this study. (2 marks) 


Check it 

1. 
Outline the central executive and episodic buffer components of the working memory model. [2 marks + 2 marks] 

2. 
Brie˜ y outline the working memory model. [4 marks] 

3. 
Outline one limitation of the working memory model. [2 marks] 

4. 
Describe and evaluate the working memory model. 



[12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 
 The working memory model // 53 

Explanations for forgetting: Interference 
The specification says… 
Explanations for forgetting: proactive and 
retroactive interference. 
Forgetting is the other side of the coin to remembering. Psychologists have tried to understand and explain it by carrying out research studies and formulating theories about why we forget. The specif cation focuses on two explanations. On this spread we consider the f rst of these: interference. 
Key terms 
Interference˜Forgetting because one memory blocks another, causing one or both memories to be distorted or forgotten. 
Proactive interference (PI) Forgetting occurs when older memories, already stored, disrupt the recall of newer memories. The degree of forgetting is greater when the memories are similar. 
Retroactive interference (RI) Forgetting occurs when newer memories disrupt the recall of older memories already stored. The degree of forgetting is again greater when the memories are similar. 
Graph showing fi ndings from the study by McGeoch and McDonald. 
5 
4 
3 
2 
1 
0 Synonyms Antonyms Unrelated Consonant Numbers None words syllables 
Type of interfering material 
Forgetting adverts 
Raymond Burke and Thomas Question 
Mean number of items recalled 
Interference theory 
Some forgetting takes place because of interference. This occurs when two pieces of information disrupt each other, resulting in forgetting of one or both, or in some distortion of memory. 
Interference has been proposed mainly as an explanation for forgetting in long-term memory (LTM). Once information has reached LTM it is more-or-less permanent. Therefore, any forgetting of LTMs is most likely because we can’t get access to them even though they are available. Interference between memories makes it harder for us to locate them, and this is experienced as ‘forgetting’. 
Types of interference 
It is very likely that the two (or more) memories that are interfering with each other were stored at diff erent times. So psychologists recognise that there are two types of interference: 
• 
Proactive interference (PI) occurs when an older memory interferes with a newer one (pro in this context means working forwards, from old to new). For example, your teacher has learned so many names in the past that she has di.  culty remembering the names of her current class. 

• 
Retroactive interference (RI) happens when a newer memory interferes with an older one (retro meaning working backwards). For example, your teacher has learned so many new names this year that she has di.  culty remembering the names of the students last year. 


Research on effects of similarity 
In both PI and RI, the interference is worse when the memories (or learning) are similar, as discovered by John McGeoch and William McDonald (1931). 
Procedure McGeoch and McDonald studied retroactive interference by changing the amount of similarity between two sets of materials. Participants had to learn a list of 10 words until they could remember them with 100% accuracy. They then learned a new list. There were six groups of participants who had to learn diff erent types of new lists: 
• 
Group 1: synonyms – words with the same meanings as the originals. 

• 
Group 2: antonyms – words with the opposite meanings to the originals. 

• 
Group 3: words unrelated to the original ones. 

• 
Group 4: consonant syllables. 

• 
Group 5: three-digit numbers. 

• 
Group 6: no new list – these participants just rested (control condition). 


Findings and conclusions When the participants were asked to recall the original list of words, the most similar material (synonyms) produced the worst recall. This shows that interference is strongest when the memories are similar. The fi ndings are shown in the graph on the left . 
Explanation of the effects of similarity 
The reason similarity aff ects recall may be for one of two reasons. It could be due to PI – previously stored information makes new similar information more di.  cult to store. Or it could be due to RI – new information overwrites previous similar memories because of the similarity. 

of magazine adverts to their participants, who had to recall the details of what they had seen (for  Use your knowledge of interference theory to explain the ÿ ndings of this study.  Caleb  
example, the brand names).  Caleb saw a ÿ lm about zombies a while ago, and  
In some cases, they had more difÿ culty in recalling earlier adverts. In other cases, they had problems remembering the later ones. The effect was greater when the adverts were similar (that is, the adverts were for identical products by  went to see a different one recently. A friend, Ashton, asked him some questions about the ÿ rst ÿ lm but Caleb found he had trouble recalling the details accurately. A second friend, Anais, then joined in and wanted to know about the recent ÿ lm Caleb went to see. But, again, Caleb seemed to forget some parts of it.  
different brands).  Question  
Outline the interference theory of forgetting,  
referring to Caleb’s experience in your answer.  

Skrull (1988) presented a series 







Explanations for forgetting: Retrieval failure 
The specification says… 
Explanations for forgetting: retrieval 
failure due to absence of cues. 
There is a di. erence between accessibility and availability of information in memory. The main reason we forget material from our vast long-term memory store is because the material is not accessible (we can’t get at it) even though it is available (it is actually present). This is likely to be due to a lack of the right ‘triggers’ or cues. 
Key terms 
Retrieval failure˜A form of forgetting. It occurs when we don’t have the necessary cues to access memory.  The memory is available but not accessible unless a suitable cue is provided. 
Cue˜A ‘trigger’ of information that allows us to access a memory. Such cues may be meaningful or may be indirectly linked by being encoded at the time of learning. Indirect cues may be external (environmental context) or internal (mood or degree of drunkenness). 
Retrieval-failure theory argues that forgetting will occur when the contexts of learning and recall are different. 
Paul 
Paul drove his friends out to the countryside for an evening meal. Just as they got to the restaurant car park he suddenly realised he had forgotten his wallet. ‘I keep my wallet and jacket in different places, but always pick them up together,’ Paul said. ‘But because it’s such a lovely evening, I decided not to bother with the jacket.’ 
Question 
Can you explain how Paul leaving his jacket meant that he also forgot his wallet? 

Retrieval failure due to the absence of cues 
The reason people forget information may be because of insu.  cient cues. When information is initially placed in memory, associated cues are stored at the same time. If these cues are not available at the time of recall, it may appear as if you have forgotten the information but, in fact, this is due to retrieval failure 
– not being able to access memories that are there (i.e. available). 
Encoding specif city principle 
Endel Tulving (1983) reviewed research into retrieval failure and discovered a consistent pattern to the fi ndings. He summarised this pattern in what he called the encoding specifi city principle (ESP). This states that a cue (if it is going to be helpful) has to be both (1) present at encoding (when we learn the material) and (2) present at retrieval (when we are recalling it). It follows from this that if the cues available at encoding and retrieval are diff erent (or if cues are entirely absent at retrieval) there will be some forgetting. 
Some cues are encoded at the time of learning in a meaningful way. For example, the cue ‘STM’ may lead you to recall all sorts of information about short-term memory. Such cues are used in many mnemonic techniques (see page 223). 
Other cues are also encoded at the time of learning but not in a meaningful way. We will consider two examples of non-meaningful cues: 
• 
Context-dependent forgetting – recall depends on external cue (e.g. weather or a place). 

• 
State-dependent forgetting – recall depends on internal cue (e.g. feeling upset, being drunk). 


Research on context-dependent forgetting 
Procedure Duncan Godden and Alan Baddeley (1975) studied deep-sea divers who work underwater to see if training on land helped or hindered their work underwater. The divers learned a list of words either underwater or on land and then were asked to recall the words either underwater or on land. This created four conditions: 
• 
Learn on land – recall on land. • Learn underwater – recall on land. 

• 
Learn on land – recall underwater. • Learn underwater – recall underwater. 


Findings and conclusions In two of these conditions the environmental contexts of learning and recall matched, whereas in the other two they did not. Accurate recall was 40% lower in the non-matching conditions. They concluded that the external cues available at learning were diff erent from the ones available at recall and this led to retrieval failure. 
Research on state-dependent forgetting 
Procedure Sara Carter and Helen Cassaday (1998) gave antihistamine drugs (for treating hay fever) to their participants. The antihistamines had a mild sedative eff ect making the participants slightly drowsy. This creates an internal physiological state diff erent from the ‘normal’ state of being awake and alert. The participants had to learn lists of words and passages of prose and then recall the information, again creating four conditions: 
• 
Learn on drug – recall when on drug. •  Learn not on drug – recall when on drug. 

• 
Learn on drug – recall when not on drug. •  Learn not on drug – recall when not on drug. 


Findings In the conditions where there was a mismatch between internal state at learning and recall, performance on the memory test was signifi cantly worse. So when the cues are absent (for example, you are drowsy when recalling information but had been alert learning it) then there is more forgetting. 
That stinks! 
Smell can act as a context-related cue to memory as shown in a study by John Aggleton and Louise Waskett (1999). They conducted their study at the Jorvik Museum in the city of York. In Viking times, 1000 years ago, York was called Jorvik and the ruins still exist under today’s city. At the museum, the town has been reconstructed so you can travel back in time and experience what Jorvik was like – including the smells. 
The researchers found that recreating these smells helped people to recall the details of their trip to the museum more accurately, even after several years. 
Questions 
1. 
Explain this ÿ nding in terms of cues. 

2. 
Can you think of a way in which ÿ ndings like these could be used to help elderly people who are having memory difÿ culties? 





4. 
Sketch a bar chart to display the four ÿndings given. Remember to label axes clearly. (3 marks) 


5. 
Use your knowledge of retrieval failure to explain the ÿndings of this study. (3 marks)






Factors affecting the accuracyofeyewitness testimony: Misleading information 




False memory 


Seema Clifaseÿ and colleagues (2013) attempted to use leading questions to implant a memory of an event that never happened (called a false memory). They did this by giving their participants a document that claimed to be a personalised food and drink proÿle. This was supposedly put together by powerful computer software based on the participants’ earlier responses to a questionnaire. For one group, their proÿles included the false information that they had once, many years earlier, drunk so much alcohol that they were sick. 
Later, the participants completed a memory test in which a leading question asked when they had become sick from drinking too much alcohol. The researchers found that a signiÿcant number of the participants ‘recalled’ being sick due to drinking too much alcohol when they were younger. But even more surprisingly, a proportion of these participants also claimed that they now disliked certain alcoholic drinks because of this (non-existent) experience. 
Question 
Using your knowledge of the effects of misleading information, explain the ÿndings from this study. 



Evaluation 
Real-world application 

One strength of research into misleading information is that it has important practical uses in the criminal justice system. 
The consequences of inaccurate EWT can be very serious. Loft us (1975) believes that leading questions can have such a distorting eff ect on memory that police o.  cers need to be very careful about how they phrase their questions when interviewing eyewitnesses. Psychologists are sometimes asked to act as expert witnesses in court trials and explain the limits of EWT to juries. 
This shows that psychologists can help to improve the way the legal system works, especially by protecting innocent people from faulty convictions based on unreliable EWT. 
Counterpoint However, the practical applications of EWT may 
be aff ected by issues with research. For instance, Loft us and Palmer’s 
participants watched  fi lm clips in a lab, a very diff erent experience from 
witnessing a real event (e.g. less stressful). Also, Rachel Foster et al. (1994) 
point out that what eyewitnesses remember has important consequences 
in the real world, but participants’ responses in research do not matter in 
the same way (so research participants are less motivated to be accurate). 
This suggests that researchers such as Loft us are too pessimistic about 
the eff ects of misleading information – EWT may be more dependable 
than many studies suggest. 
Evidence against substitution 

One limitation of the substitution explanation is that EWT is more accurate for some aspects of an event than for others. 
For example, Rachel Sutherland and Harlene Hayne (2001) showed participants a video clip. When participants were later asked misleading questions, their recall was more accurate for central details of the event than for peripheral ones. Presumably the participants’ attention was focused on central features of the event and these memories were relatively resistant to misleading information. 
This suggests that the original memories for central details survived and were not distorted, an outcome that is not predicted by the substitution explanation. 
Evidence challenging memory conformity 
Another limitation of the memory conformity explanation is evidence that post-event discussion actually alters EWT. 
Elin Skagerberg and Daniel Wright (2008) showed their participants fi lm clips. There were two versions, e.g. a mugger’s hair was dark brown in one but light brown in the other. Participants discussed the clips in pairs, each having seen diff erent versions. They oft en did not report what they had seen in the clips or what they had heard from the co-witness, but a ‘blend’ of the two (e.g. a common answer to the hair question was not ‘light brown’ or ‘dark brown’ but ‘medium brown’). 
This suggests that the memory itself is distorted through contamination by misleading post-event discussion, rather than the result of memory conformity. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Demand characteristics 
Lab studies have identifi ed misleading information as a cause of inaccurate EWT, partly by being able to control variables. 

But Maria Zaragoza and Michael McCloskey (1989) argue that many answers given by participants in lab studies are due to demand characteristics. Participants usually want to be helpful and not let the researcher down. So they guess when they are asked a question they don’t know the answer to. 
Consider: How can researchers maximise the internal validity of EWT research? 
Witnesses in court trials swear an oath to tell the truth. They may think they are telling the truth but psychological research shows this could be an illusion. 
Loftus and Palmer 

We described Loftus and Palmer’s study on  Verb  Mean estimate  
the facing page. The ÿ ndings from this study are shown in the table on the right.  Contacted  (mph) 31.8  
Questions  Hit  34.0  
1. Write a suitable aim for this study. (2 marks)  Bumped  38.1  
2. There were ÿ ve groups of participants  Collided  39.3  
in this study. Explain why it would have  Smashed  40.5  
been necessary to randomly allocate  

participants to each of the ÿ ve groups. (2 marks) 
3. 
Questionnaires were used to collect the data. Explain one strength and one limitation of using questionnaires in this study. (4 marks) 

4. 
Identify and explain one ethical issue that arose in this study. (3 marks) 

5. 
Use your knowledge of how misleading information affects EWT to explain the ÿ ndings of this study. (3 marks) 


Disentangling post-event discussion 

Hartmut Bodner et al. (2009) found that the effects of post-event discussion can be reduced if participants are warned of their impact. Recall was more accurate for those participants who were warned that anything they hear from a co-witness is second-hand information (or ‘hearsay’) and that they should forget it and recall only their own memory of the event. 
This ÿ nding can help us decide if Gabbert et al.’s explanation of PED on the facing page is correct. 
Question 
If a warning can negate the effects of post-event discussion, does this show that memory conformity is occurring? Explain your answer. 
Check it 

1. 
Explain what is meant by ‘post-event discussion’. [2 marks] 

2. 
Give an example of a leading question and explain how this might affect the accuracy of eyewitness testimony. [3 marks] 

3. 
Explain how post-event discussion may affect the accuracy of eyewitness testimony. [3 marks] 

4. 
Describe and evaluate research into the in˜ uence of misleading information on the accuracy of eyewitness testimony. [12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 


 Factors affecting the accuracy of eyewitness testimony: Misleading information // 59 
Factors affecting the accuracy of eyewitness 
testimony: Anxiety 




destruction wrought by Hurricane Andrew in the United States in 1992. The researchers deÿned anxiety in terms of the amount of damage the participants suffered to their homes.  Questions 1. Based on the inverted-U theory, can you predict which group showed the most accurate  Yerkes Dodson Law The inverted U theory states that performance will  
The researchers found that there was a link between  recall? Explain why you chose  increase with  
the level of recall and the amount of damage/anxiety  this group.  stress, but only to  
experienced.  2. Do you think the method used to operationalise anxiety is a  a certain point, where it decreases  low  medium  high  
60 //  Chapter 2 Memory  valid way of measuring anxiety?  drastically.  Arousal  




Improving the accuracy of eyewitness testimony: Cognitive interview 
The specification says… 
Improving the accuracy of eyewitness testimony, including the use of the cognitive interview. 

We have seen that eyewitness testimony may lack accuracy, yet such accuracy is vital to the police and the courts. So psychologists have turned their attention to fnding ways of improving the accuracy of EWT based on sound psychological evidence, such as the cognitive interview. 
Key term 

Cognitive interview (CI) A method of interviewing eyewitnesses to help them retrieve more accurate memories. It uses four main techniques, all based on evidence-based psychological knowledge of human memory – report everything, reinstate the context, reverse the order and change perspective. 
Study tip 
It is worth thinking about how the cognitive interview might be used in a real-world scenario. Think about how a police o.cer would ask questions and how this would a.ect the responses from witnesses. Always consider the e.ects on characters in any scenario. 
A great strength of the cognitive interview is that its techniques are based on sound psychological research 
into how human memory works. For example, report everything and reinstate the context are both based on Tulving’s encoding speciÿcity hypothesis (see page 56). 
These techniques aren’t just useful in recalling crimes. You can use them to try and recall any event you have been part of or witnessed and want to remember more about. Try it for yourself. 
Think of any fairly recent situation. Picture the setting in your mind. What is the weather like? What time of day is it? What can you see? Think about the internal context as well. How do you feel? Happy? Sad? Can’t remember? It’s worth persisting – you might be surprised how much you recall that you thought you’d forgotten. 
Now change your perspective. Is there someone else there? Picture the situation as they see it. What can you see now? Anything different? 
Questions 
1. 
What did you discover? 

2. 
What do you think the techniques of the cognitive interview tell us about the difference between the availability and accessibility of memories? 


62 //  Chapter 2 Memory 



Evaluation 
Support for the effectiveness of the CI 
One strength of the cognitive interview is evidence that it works. 
For example, a meta-analysis by Günter Köhnken et al. (1999) combined data from 55 studies comparing the CI (and the ECI) with the standard police interview. The CI gave an average 41% increase in accurate information compared with the standard interview. Only four studies in the analysis showed no diff erence between the types of interview. 
This shows that the CI is an eff ective technique in helping witnesses to recall information that is stored in memory (available) but not immediately accessible. 
Counterpoint Köhnken et al. also found an increase 
in the amount of inaccurate information recalled by 
participants. This was a particular issue in the ECI, which 
produced more incorrect details than the CI. Cognitive 
interviews may sacrifi ce quality of EWT (i.e. accuracy) in 
favour of quantity (amount of details).  
This means that police o.  cers should treat eyewitness 
evidence from CIs/ECIs with caution.  
Some elements may be more useful 
One limitation of the original CI is that not all of its elements are equally eff ective or useful. 
Rebecca Milne and Ray Bull (2002) found that each of the four techniques used alone produced more information than the standard police interview. But they also found that using a combination of report everything and reinstate the context produced better recall than any of the other elements or combination of them. This confi rmed police o.  cers’ suspicions that some aspects of the CI are more useful than others. 
This casts some doubt on the credibility of the overall cognitive interview. 
The CI is time-consuming 
Another limitation is that police o.  cers may be reluctant to use the CI because it takes more time and training than the standard police interview. 
For example, more time is needed to establish rapport with a witness and allow them to relax. The CI also requires special training and many forces do not have the resources to provide more than a few hours (Kebbell and Wagstaff 1997). 
This suggests that the complete CI as it exists is not a realistic method for police o.  cers to use and (as in the point above) it might be better to focus on just a few key elements. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Variations of the CI 
Police forces have taken a ‘pick and mix’ approach to the various techniques in the CI. This means it is hard to compare the eff ectiveness of diff erent approaches in research studies. 
On the other hand, this ‘pick and mix’ approach is more fl exible. It means that individuals can develop their own approach according to what works best for them. 
Consider: On balance, is this variation between police forces a strength or limitation of the CI? 
Assessing the cognitive interview 

A psychologist carried out an experiment to ÿ nd out if a cognitive interview was more effective than a standard police interview (no fancy cognitive techniques) in helping witnesses to recall more information. She placed an advert in local newspapers asking for people to participate. The advert indicated that participants would be shown a short ÿ lm of a knifepoint mugging, and that they would be interviewed by a police ofÿ cer. 
Once all the data was collected, the psychologist compared the mean number of items correctly recalled in the cognitive interview with the mean number of items correctly recalled in the standard police interview. 
Questions 

1. 
Explain what experimental design might be used in this study. Outline what you would do to conduct the study. (3 marks) 

2. 
Explain one strength and one limitation of this experimental design. Refer to the study described above in your answer. (2 marks + 2 marks) 

3. 
Identify the sampling method used in this study. (1 mark) 

4. 
Explain how investigator effects might have operated in this study. (3˜marks) 

5. 
Explain how a pilot study might have been conducted in the context of this study. (3 marks) 



Write your own 
A police ofÿ cer trained in using the cognitive interview is helping a witness to recall more information about a mugging. Eventually, she gives the witness the following instruction: ‘Please tell me as much as you can remember about what you saw. Please do not leave anything out, even if you think they are just unimportant small details.’ 
Questions 
1. 
Which of the four main techniques of the cognitive interview is being used in the above statement? 

2. 
For the three other techniques, write down the exact wording of the instructions the police ofÿ cer might give to the witness. 


Check it 

1. 
Explain what is meant by ‘cognitive interview’. [2 marks] 

2. 
Outline how the cognitive interview can improve the accuracy of EWT. [4 marks] 

3. 
Cognitive interviews have been developed to improve EWT. Identify and explain two techniques used in the cognitive interview. [6 marks] 

4. 
Describe and evaluate the cognitive interview as a way of improving the accuracy of EWT. [12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 


 Improving the accuracy of eyewitness testimony: Cognitive interview // 63 

Practical corner 
The specification says… 
Knowledge and understanding of ... research methods, practical research skills and maths skills. These should be developed through ... ethical practical research activities. 

This means that you should conduct practical investigations wherever possible. The topic of memory is ideally suited to experimental research. Questionnaires are also frequently used to gather data for analysis. The two practical activities on this spread give you an opportunity to use both of these methods. 
Ethics check 
Ethics are discussed in detail on pages 178 179. We strongly suggest that you complete this checklist before collecting data. 
1. 
Do participants know participation is voluntary? 

2. 
Do participants know what to expect? 

3. 
Do participants know they can withdraw at any time? 

4. 
Are individuals’ results anonymous? 

5. 
Have I minimised the risk of distress to participants? 

6. 
Have I avoided asking sensitive questions? 

7. 
Will I avoid bringing my school/teacher/psychology into disrepute? 

8. 
Have I considered all other ethical issues? 

9. 
Has my teacher approved this? 


Creating your materials 





















For all groups you need a reasoning task (Task 1). You should construct a table for this. It should include ten sentences about the relationship between the letters A and B, plus space for the participants to record a response. You can use these five sentences to start you off: 
Letters  Statement  TRUE  FALSE  
AB  A follows B.  
BA  B is followed by A.  
BA  A does not come before B.  
AB  B is followed by A.  
BA  A follows B.  




Table 1 Time taken to complete reasoning task (secs). 
1. 
Redo Table 1 on the right, giving all 4. Sketch the graphical display you have identiÿed data to the nearest whole number. in your previous answer. Remember to label your (2 marks) axes carefully. (3 marks) 

2. 
Calculate the mean and the range for 5. Based on the descriptive statistics, what 

each group/condition. (3˜marks) conclusion could you draw about the effect of the verbal task on performance of the reasoning 

3. 
Which type of graphical display 



task? (2 marks)would be appropriate to present the 
results in Table 1? (1 mark) 6. Do these ÿndings support the working memory model? Explain your answer. (2 marks) 

Condition A  Condition B  
32.38  42.73  
28.93  50.21  
34.27  43.63  
30.41  46.25  
36.84  44.37  
34.28  45.81  
37.11  67.32  
29.79  48.91  
37.46  41.63  
35.58  47.79  



I m outta here! 

Don t forget, your participants have a right to withdraw from your experiment. 

Revision summaries 


Word recall of similar/dissimilar Digit span Duration of STM words Jacobs: 9.3 digits, 7.3 letters. Peterson and Peterson: about 18 seconds without rehearsal. Baddeley: acoustic in STM, 
Span of memory and chunking Duration of LTM 
semantic in LTM. Miller: 7 ±2 span, putting items together extends STM capacity. Bahrick et al. (yearbooks): face recognition 90%, free recall 60% (15 years). Face recognition 70%, free recall 30% (48 years). 
Evaluation 

Evaluation 
Separate memory stores 
Evaluation 
A valid study 

Identified STM and LTM, supporting multi-store model. Later studies replicated findings (e.g. Bopp and Verhaeghen), Meaningless stimuli in STM study so valid test of digit span. Petersons used consonant syllables, lacks external validity. 
Artificial stimuli Not so many chunks High external validity 
Word lists had no personal meaning. 

Miller overestimated STM, only four chunks (Cowan). Bahrick et al. used meaningful materials, better recall than studies with meaningless stimuli (Shepard). 


Three different long-term memory stores. 
The theory Evaluation 
Episodic memory Clinical evidence 
Memory for events in our lives Clive Wearing and HM had damaged episodic (‘diary’). Time-stamped. memories but semantic and procedural memories were relatively fine. 
Semantic memory 
Counterpoint – clinical studies lack control of 
Memory for knowledge of the 
variables (e.g. memory before injury). 
world, like an encyclopaedia and dictionary (knowledge of words). Conflicting neuroimaging evidence Research links semantic to left prefrontal cortex 
Procedural memory 
and episodic to right (Buckner and Petersen), 
Memory for automatic and often 
di.erent in other studies (Tulving et al.).
skilled behaviours. Unconscious recall. Real-world application Old-age memory loss improved by intervention to target episodic memory (Belleville et al.). 
Evaluation extra: Same or different? 
Tulving now suggests episodic may be specialised subcategory of semantic but Alzheimer’s patients could form episodic not semantic memories (Hodges and Patterson). 
’. 


Features of short-term memory and long-term memory. 
Research on coding Research on capacity Research on duration 






One memory disrupts another. Forgetting because of a lack of cues. 
Interference Evaluation Retrieval failure 
Types of interference Real-world interference Encoding specificity principle Real-world application 
Proactive – old memories Rugby players remembered less if played more games over a Tulving: cues most e.ective if Cues are weak but worth paying attention to as disrupt new ones. season (Baddeley and Hitch). present at coding and at retrieval. strategy for improving recall. Retroactive – new memories Counterpoint – interference unusual in everyday situations Link between cues and material 
Research support 

disrupt old ones. (e.g. similarity unusual). may be meaningful (e.g. ‘STM’) or Wide range of support suggests this is main reason 
meaningless (context and state). 

for forgetting (Eysenck and Keane). McGeoch and McDonald – six Interference e.ects are overcome using cues (Tulving and Context-dependent forgetting Counterpoint – no forgetting unless contexts are very groups learned lists, similar Psotka). Godden and Baddeley (deep-sea di.erent, e.g. on land versus underwater (Baddeley). words (synonyms) created 
Effects of similarity Interference and cues 

divers) – recall better when more interference. 
Support from drug studies Recall versus recognition 
external contexts matched. 

Taking diazepam after learning reduces interference 
No context e.ects when memory assessed using Explanation of the effects of and forgetting = retrograde facilitation (Coenen and van State-dependent forgetting recognition test (Godden and Baddeley). similarity Luijtelaar). Carter and Cassaday PI (makes new information 
Evaluation extra: Problems with the ESP Evaluation extra: Validity issues 
(antihistamine) – recall better 

when internal states matched. Research support for the principle but no information overwritten). Lab studies have high control but use artificial materials and di.cult to store) or RI (old 
independent measure of cue encoding. unrealistic procedures. 

Post-event information and high arousal affect EWT. 
Misleading information Evaluation The e˜ects of anxiety Evaluation 
Leading questions Real-world application Anxiety has a negative effect on Unusualness not anxiety Speed estimates a.ected by leading Insights applied to police interviewing and recall Poor recall due to unusualness (chicken and question e.g. smashed, contacted expert witnesses. Johnson and Scott (weapon focus) – handgun), not anxiety (Pickel). (Loftus and Palmer). 
high-anxiety knife condition led to Counterpoint – film clips in lab are less 

Support for negative effects 
poorer recall. 

stressful than everyday life, no consequences. 
Why do leading questions affect EWT? 
London Dungeon – anxiety reduced accurate recall EWT more reliable. Tunnel theory of memory. 

Response bias – no change to memory. 

of an individual (Valentine and Mesout). Substitution explanation – supported Evidence against substitution Anxiety has a positive effect on recall 
Support for positive effects 

by report of seeing broken glass. Central details not much a.ected by misleading Yuille and Cutshall (shooting in gun The most anxious eyewitness at bank robbery information (Sutherland and Hayne). shop) – high anxiety associated with had the most accurate recall (Christianson and 
Post-event discussion (PED) 

better recall when witnessing real Co-witness discussion a.ects memories Evidence challenging memory conformity Hübinette). 
crime. of event (Gabbert et al.). Post-event information on hair colour 
Counterpoint – interviews were long after event, blended, supporting contamination Explaining the contradictory findings lacks control of confounding variables. 
Why does PED affect EWT? 

(Skagerberg and Wright). De.enbacher reviewed 21 studies, Memory contamination – mix 
Evaluation extra: Problems with inverted-U theory 
Yerkes-Dodson inverted-U theory (mis)information from others. Evaluation extra: Demand characteristics suggests both low and high anxiety Explains contradictory findings but focuses just Memory conformity – responses given Lab environment enables control but answers lead to poor recall. on physical arousal, ignores cognitive aspects of for social approval. in lab studies influenced by desire to be 
anxiety. helpful (demand characteristics). 





Fisher and Geiselman’s method is based on psychological evidence. 


The cognitive interview (CI) 
1. Report everything 

Include even unimportant details. 
2. Reinstate the context 

Picture the scene and recall how you felt. Avoids context-dependent forgetting. 
3. Reverse the order 

Recall from the end and work backwards. Disrupts expectations. 
4. Change perspective 

Put yourself in the shoes of someone else present. Disrupts schema. 
5. The enhanced cognitive interview (ECI) 
Adds social dynamics, e.g. establishing eye contact. 
Evaluation 
Support for the effectiveness of the CI 
CI produce 41% more accurate recall than standard 
interview (Köhnken et al.). Counterpoint – CI also increases inaccurate information (Köhnken et al.), even more true for ECI. 
Some elements may be more useful 
Report everything and reinstate the context used together produced best recall (Milne and Bull). 
The CI is time-consuming 
It takes longer and needs special training (Kebbell and Wagsta.), full CI not realistic for police. 
Evaluation extra: Variations of the CI 
‘Pick and mix’ approach makes it hard to compare e.ectiveness but gives more flexibility. 
 Revision summaries // 67 

Practice questions, answers and feedback 
Question 1 Outline the procedure and findings of one study that has investigated the working memory model. (4 marks) 
Morticia’s answer Baddeley et al. looked at dual-task performance. Participants had to do a verbal task and a visual task together. Their performance was the same as when they did the tasks separately. But when they did two visual tasks together, performance on both was poor. This shows there are separate subsystems processing verbal and visual information. 
Luke’s answer The working memory model was investigated where participants were given two tasks, one task was a visual task and one was a verbal task. The results showed that these could be done because there are different parts to short-term memory. However, the study lacked ecological validity. 
Vladimir’s answer There was a case study of KF who had brain damage. KF had some problems with his short-term memory but not his long-term memory. In fact it was only some aspects of STM that were damaged. KF could deal with visual input and remember this in the short term but could not deal with numbers. This supports the working memory model. 
Question 2 Briefly explain one strength of the working memory model. (2 marks) Morticia has produced a detailed and accurate description of a relevant study. The procedure and findings are all well-explained as required by the question. 
Luke describes a study that is not identifiable without more detail/ explanation of the tasks involved. There might have been some value in the answer if the subcomponents that would be needed to perform these tasks were mentioned. The last sentence does not add anything. 
Vladimir includes some relevant information – the idea that parts of STM can remain intact whilst others are damaged. However, there again are no named components of working memory here and the reference to KF not being able to ‘deal with numbers’ is vague. A weak answer. 
Morticia gives an accurate and sufficiently detailed answer for a 2-mark question. 

Morticia’s answer One strength is that it is unlike the multi-store 
She uses a reasoned comparison with the multi-store model. 

model which suggests short-term memory is a unitary store whereas 
the WMM shows how STM is divided into different subsystems such as the phonological loop and visuo-spatial sketchpad. 
Luke’s answer One strength is it goes into more complex detail on 
Luke also makes a comparison with the multi-store model but his point needs 
how short-term memory works than the multi-store model. 
further elaboration for the second mark (how is working memory ‘more complex’?). 


Vladimir says nothing of any value. The first half of the sentence is not strong enough to earn credit and the second half is vague. 
Question 3 What is meant by ‘procedural memory’? Give an example. (2 marks) 
Morticia provides a clear definition and a relevant example – just a perfect student! 


Luke’s answer Procedural memory is a type of long-term memory that 
Luke provides an inaccurate definition and there is no example. 

holds unlimited information and has knowledge of sequences, events, personal memories, lists and can be retrieved at a later date. 
Vladimir’s example is fine but the definition that comes before it is not strong enough to be worth including. Vladimir should have referred to ‘memory for actions/motor skills’ rather than ‘how to do something’ which is a little vague. 


On this spread we look at some typical student answers to questions. The comments provided indicate what is good and bad in each answer. Learning how to produce effective question answers is a SKILL. Read pages 213 223 for guidance. 
 Practice questions, answers and feedback // 69 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
 Multiple-choice questions // 71 
From Étude Réaliste by AC Swinburne
    A baby’s eyes, ere speech begin,    Ere lips learn words or sighs, Bless all things bright enough to win    A baby’s eyes.
    Love, while the sweet thing laughs and lies,    And sleep flows out and in,    Sees perfect in them Paradise. 
Their glance might cast out pain and sin,    Their speech make dumb the wise,    By mute glad godhead felt within    A baby’s eyes. 


Contents 
Caregiver–infant interactions 74 Schaffer’s stages of attachment 76 The role of the father 78 Animal studies of attachment 80 Explanations of attachment: 
Learning theory 82 
Bowlby’s theory 84 Types of attachment 86 Cultural variations in attachment 88 Bowlby’s theory of maternal deprivation 90 Romanian orphan studies: 
Institutionalisation 92 Influence of early attachment on later relationships 94 
Practical corner 96 Revision summaries 98 Practice questions, answers and feedback 100 Multiple-choice questions 102 
Chapter 3 Contents // 73 

Caregiver–infant interactions 

Evaluation 
Filmed observations 
One strength of the research on this topic is that caregiver–infant interactions are usually fi lmed in a laboratory. 

This means that other activity, that might distract a baby, can be controlled. Also, using fi lms means that observations can be recorded and analysed later. Therefore it is unlikely that researchers will miss seeing key behaviours. Furthermore having fi lmed interactions means that more than one observer can record data and establish the inter-rater reliability of observations. Finally, babies don’t know they are being observed, so their behaviour does not change in response to observation (this is generally the main problem for overt observations). 
Therefore the data collected in such research should have good reliability and validity. 
Diff culty observing babies 

One limitation of research into caregiver–infant interaction is that it is hard to interpret a baby’s behaviour. 
Young babies lack co-ordination and much of their bodies are almost immobile. The movements being observed are just small hand movements or subtle changes in expression. It is di.  cult to be sure, for example, whether a baby is smiling or just passing wind. It is also di.  cult to determine what is taking place from the baby’s perspective. For example, we cannot know whether a movement such as a hand twitch is random or triggered by something the caregiver has done. 
This means we cannot be certain that the behaviours seen in caregiver– infant interactions have a special meaning. 
Developmental importance 

A further limitation is that simply observing a behaviour does not tell us its developmental importance. 
Ruth Feldman (2012) points out that ideas like synchrony (and by implication reciprocity) simply give names to patterns of observable caregiver and baby behaviours. These are robust phenomena in the sense that they can be reliably observed, but they still may not be particularly useful in understanding child development as it does not tell us the purpose of these behaviours. 
This means that we cannot be certain from observational research alone 
that reciprocity and synchrony are important for a child’s development. 
Counterpoint There is evidence from other lines of research to 
suggest that early interactions are important. For example Isabella et al. 
(1989) found that achievement of interactional synchrony predicted the 
development of a good quality attachment. 

This means that, on balance, caregiver–infant interaction is probably 
important in development. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Practical value versus ethics 

Research into early caregiver–infant interaction has practical applications in parenting skills training. For example, Rebecca Crotwell et al. (2013) found that a 10-minute Parent–Child Interaction Therapy (PCIT) improved interactional synchrony in 20 low-income mothers and their pre-school children. 
On the other hand research into caregiver–infant interaction is socially sensitive because it can be used to argue that when a mother returns to work soon aft er having a baby this may risk damaging their baby’s development. 
Consider: Does the practical value outweigh the social sensitivity of the research? How valuable is this research? 
Sports such as diving and swimming can involve synchronisation. 
Interactional synchrony involves a bit more than just performing in unison – each partner is responding to the other’s cues. 
Observations 
Much of the research into caregiver–infant interaction has been carried out by observation. For example Meltzoff and Moore observed caregiver–infant interaction in very young babies. 
Questions 

1. 
Observations are often recorded. Explain why this could increase the validity of the research. (2 marks) 

2. 
Explain how the reliability of the observations could be checked. (2 marks) 

3. 
What would be the beneÿ t of conducting this research in a laboratory? (2 marks) 



Helping Helga 

Research into caregiver–infant interaction has therapeutic applications. Helga is a ÿ rst-time mother who is unemployed and without permanent accommodation. She is struggling to bond with her three-month-old baby, Wilma. Helga attends a clinic where a psychologist notices that Helga is experiencing severe stress. The psychologist explores the reason for this. 
Question 
Referring to research into caregiver–infant interaction, suggest how 
Helga’s psychologist might explain her difÿ culties. 
Check it 
1. Explain what is meant by ‘interactional synchrony’. 

[2 marks] 
2. Outline research into caregiver–infant interactions. 

[4 marks] 
3. 
Outline one strength and one limitation of research into caregiver–infant interactions. [6 marks] 

4. 
Describe and evaluate research into caregiver–infant interactions. [12 marks AS, 16 marks A4] 


 Caregiver–infant interactions // 75 

Schaffer’s stages of attachment 
The specification says… 


Stages of attachment as identified by Schaffer. Multiple attachments. 
Various theorists have identifed stages in the development of attachments, but we are concerned with those that emerged from a study by Scha.er and Emerson carried out in the 1960s in Glasgow, and the stages they identifed. 
Key terms 

Stages of attachment˜Many developmental theories identify a sequence of qualitatively di.erent behaviours linked to specifc ages. In the case of ‘stages of attachment’ qualitatively di.erent infant (baby) behaviours are linked to specifc ages, and all babies go through them in the same order. 






41–444 4 4 45–483 3 2 49–521 1 0 53–782 2 3 



Age of onset of first specific attachment (Schaffer and Emerson 1964). 
Evaluation 
Good external validity 

One strength of Schaff er and Emerson’s research is that it has good external validity. 
Most of the observations (though not stranger anxiety) were made by parents during ordinary activities and reported to the researchers. The alternative would have been to have researchers present to record observations. This might have distracted the babies or made them feel more anxious. 
This means it is highly likely that the participants behaved naturally while being observed. 

Counterpoint On the other hand there are issues with asking the mothers to be the ‘observers’. They were unlikely to be objective observers. They might have been biased in terms of what they noticed and what they reported, for example they might not have noticed when their baby was showing signs of anxiety or they may have misremembered it. 
This means that even if babies behaved naturally their behaviour may not have been accurately recorded. 
Poor evidence for the asocial stage 

One limitation of Schaff er and Emerson’s stages is the validity of the measures they used to assess attachment in the asocial stage. 
Young babies have poor co-ordination and are fairly immobile. If babies less than two months old felt anxiety in everyday situations they might have displayed this in quite subtle, hard-to-observe ways. This made it di.  cult for mothers to observe and report back to researchers on signs of anxiety and attachment in this age group. 
This means that the babies may actually be quite social but, because of fl awed methods, they appear to be asocial. 
Real-world application 

Another strength of Schaff er and Emerson’s stages is that they have practical application in day care (where babies are cared for outside of their home by a non-family adult). 
In the asocial and indiscriminate attachment stages day care is likely to be straightforward as babies can be comforted by any skilled adult. However, Schaff er and Emerson’s research tells us that day care, especially starting day care with an unfamiliar adult, may be problematic during the specifi c attachment stage. 
This means that parents’ use of day care can be planned using Schaff er and Emerson’s stages. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Generalisability 

On the positive side Schaff er and Emerson based their stage account on a large-scale study with some good design features. On the other hand, they only looked at one sample which had unique features in terms of the cultural and historical context 
– 1960s working-class Glasgow. In other cultures, for example collectivist cultures, multiple attachments from a very early age are more the norm (van IJzendoorn 1993). 
Consider: On balance, how likely is it that Schaffer and Emerson’s stages generalise to other populations? 
Study tip 
Note how, throughout this book, we have endeavoured to close each evaluation with a summary sentence ‘This means that ...’ or ‘This shows that …’ It is important to make your critical point crystal clear. 
Babies and their carers behave more naturally when observed in their own homes. 
Tam’s separation anxiety 
Jock and Morag live with their son Tam and Morag’s mother, who looks after little Tam while Jock and Morag both work. Despite the fact that Morag works, she makes a special effort to sit and play with Tam when she gets home. 

When Tam got to the age of 7 months old he began to get quite upset when his parents left for work. His grandmother tried to distract him and give him lots of attention. 
Questions 
1. 
Referring to Schaffer and Emerson’s stages of attachment, how would you explain to Jock and Morag why Tam’s behaviour has changed? 

2. 
Based on Schaffer and Emerson’s stages, what could you advise them to expect from Tam’s attachment behaviour in the future? 


Observations 
Schaffer and Emerson used a mix of self-report and observation in their study. The observations took place in babies’ own homes – observers noted how the babies responded to their presence (stranger anxiety). 
Questions 

1. 
In what way is this study a naturalistic observation? (2 marks) 


2. 
In what way could this study be described as an overt observation? (2 marks) 

3. 
In what way could this study be described as a participant observation? (2 marks) 

4. 
Data on separation anxiety was collected from the mothers themselves. In what way may this have challenged the validity of the data collected? (2 marks) 



Check it 

1. 
Outline stages of attachment as identiÿ ed by Schaffer. [4 marks] 

2. 
Outline one strength of Schaffer’s stages of attachment. [4 marks] 

3. 
Explain what is meant by ‘multiple attachments’. [3 marks] 

4. 
Evaluate research into multiple attachments. [4 marks] 

5. 
Describe and evaluate Schaffer’s stages of attachment. 



[12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 
 Schaffer’s stages of attachment // 77 



The role ofthe father 
The specification says… 
The role of the father. 

Fathers may be important attachment fgures. Furthermore it has been suggested that they have distinctive roles in parenting. 
Key term 

Father˜In attachment research the father is anyone who takes on the role of the main male caregiver. This can be but is not necessarily the biological father. 

Caregiver versus a˜achment fgure 
There is a di.erence between a primary caregiver and a primary a°achment fgure. A primary caregiver is the person who spends most time with a baby, caring for its needs. A primary a°achment fgure is the person to whom the baby has the strongest a°achment. Often the same person fulfls the two roles but not always. 





A lifestyle choice 
Jacob and Kalwant have a decision to make. Their baby is four weeks old. Kalwant would really like to be a full-time mother but she earns a lot more than Jacob and they fear they will not manage ÿnancially if she is the stay-at-home parent. The alternative is for Jacob to take on the role of primary caregiver. 
Question 
Referring to research into fathers’ attachment, what could you tell Jacob and Kalwant about Jacob’s suitability as primary caregiver? 







Evaluation 
Confusion over research questions 

One limitation of research into the role of fathers is lack of clarity over the question being asked. 
The question, ‘What is the role of the father?’ in the context of attachment is much more complicated than it sounds. Some researchers attempting to answer this question actually want to understand the role of fathers as secondary attachment fi gures. But others are more concerned with fathers as a primary attachment fi gure. The former have tended to see fathers as behaving diff erently from mothers and having a distinct role. The latter have found that fathers can take on a ‘maternal’ role. 
This makes it di.  cult to off er a simple answer as to the ‘role of the father’. It really depends what specifi c role is being discussed. 
Conf icting evidence 

A further limitation of research into the role of fathers is that fi ndings vary according to the methodology used. 
Longitudinal studies such as that of Grossmann et al. (see facing page) have suggested that fathers as secondary attachment fi gures have an important and distinct role in their children’s development, involving play and stimulation. However, if fathers have a distinctive and important role we would expect that children growing up in single-mother and lesbian-parent families would turn out in some way diff erent from those in two-parent heterosexual families. In fact studies (e.g. McCallum and Golombok 2004) consistently show that these children do not develop diff erently from children in two-parent heterosexual families. 
This means that the question as to whether fathers have a distinctive role remains unanswered. 
Counterpoint These lines of research may not in fact be in confl ict. It could be that fathers typically take on distinctive roles in two-parent heterosexual families, but that parents in single-mother and lesbian-parent families simply adapt to accommodate the role played by fathers. 
This means that the question of a distinctive role for fathers is clear aft er all. When present, fathers tend to adopt a distinctive role, but families can adapt to not having a father. 
Real-world application 

One strength of research into the role of the father is that it can be used to off er advice to parents. 
Parents and prospective parents sometimes agonise over decisions like who should take on the primary caregiver role. For some this can even mean worrying about whether to have children at all. Mothers may feel pressured to stay at home because of stereotypical views of mothers’ and fathers’ roles. Equally, fathers may be pressured to focus on work rather than parenting. In some families this may not be economically the best solution. Research into the role of the father can be used to off er reassuring advice to parents. For example, heterosexual parents can be informed that fathers are quite capable of becoming primary attachment fi gures. Also lesbian-parent and single-mother families can be informed that not having a father around does not aff ect a child’s development. 
This means that parental anxiety about the role of fathers can be reduced. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Bias in this research 

Preconceptions about how fathers do or should behave can be created by stereotypical accounts and images of parenting roles and behaviour, for example those used in advertising. These stereotypes (e.g. fathers are not primary caregivers, fathers are stricter, etc.) may cause unintentional observer bias whereby observers ‘see’ what they expect to see rather than recording objective reality. 
Consider: To what extent do you think this might have been a problem for the studies discussed on this spread? 
Who says fathers can’t be primary caregivers? 
Observational research 

A group of students decide they would like to conduct some research on the differences between mothers and fathers as attachment ÿ gures. They decide to go to a soft-play centre near where they live and observe mothers and fathers with their babies. 
Questions 
1. 
Name two behavioural categories the students might use to record parental behaviour. Explain how each category might be relevant to assessing attachment behaviour (e.g. emotional responses). (2 marks + 2 marks) 

2. 
Identify and explain two ethical issues that the students should think about in relation to their planned research. (2 marks + 2 marks) 


Cheering up Jasper 

Research into the role of the father in attachment has allowed psychologists to advise parents about their children’s development. Jasper is the father of a 9-month-old girl, Emily. Jasper has noticed that recently when Emily is distressed she only accepts comfort from her mother. This upsets him and leaves him feeling unimportant as a parent. 
Question 
Referring to research into the role of fathers, what could you tell 
Jasper about his role in Emily’s developing attachments? 
Check it 

1. 
Research has shown that mothers and fathers may play different roles in attachment. Outline one difference that has been found in the roles of mothers and fathers in attachment. [2 marks] 

2. 
Outline two limitations of research into the role of the father in attachment. [4 marks] 

3. 
Discuss what research has shown about the role of the father in attachment. [8 marks] 


 The role of the father // 79 

Animal studies of attachment 
The specification says… 
Animal studies of attachment: Lorenz and Harlow. 

Animal studies have looked at the formation of early bonds between non human parents and their o.spring. This is of interest to psychologists because attachment like behaviour is common to a range of species and so animal studies can help us understand attachment in humans. 
Key term 

Animal studies °In psychology these are studies carried out on non-human animal species rather than on humans, either for ethical or practical reasons – practical because animals breed faster and researchers are interested in seeing results across more than one generation of animals. 


Konrad Lorenz with his imprinted geese. 


Poppy’s rescue 
Spike is a zookeeper who specialises in the care of monkeys. He has just been asked by the police to take charge of a 45-day­old orphan monkey called Poppy who was rescued from a home where she was kept alone in a cage with a soft towel. When Spike ÿrst meets the baby monkey, Poppy clings to the towel and screams in fear when she sees she is in a new environment. 
Questions 
1. 
Based on Harlow’s research how might Poppy’s social development have turned out if she had not been rescued? 

2. 
Referring to Harlow’s research, suggest how Spike should proceed with Poppy. How good are her chances of healthy development? 




Farming 

Farmers have long been aware of the idea of imprinting. One common practice to ensure 
the survival of orphan (motherless) lambs is to take the ° eece from a dead lamb and wrap 
it around the orphan lamb. The mother of the dead lamb looks after the orphan as if it 
were her own offspring, thus ensuring its survival. 
Question 

How can you use the concept of imprinting to explain this? 
Evaluation 
Research support 

One strength of Lorenz’s research is the existence of support for the concept of imprinting. 
A study by Lucia Regolin and Giorgio Vallortigara (1995) supports Lorenz’s idea of imprinting. Chicks were exposed to simple shape combinations that moved, such as a triangle with a rectangle in front. A range of shape combinations were then moved in front of them and they followed the original most closely. 
This supports the view that young animals are born with an innate mechanism to imprint on a moving object present in the critical window of development, as predicted by Lorenz. 
Generalisability to humans 

One limitation of Lorenz’s studies is the ability to generalise fi ndings and conclusions from birds to humans. 
The mammalian attachment system is quite diff erent and more complex than that in birds. For example, in mammals attachment is a two-way process, so it is not just the young who become attached to their mothers but also the mammalian mothers show an emotional attachment to their young. 
This means that it is probably not appropriate to generalise Lorenz’s ideas to humans. 
Evaluation eXtra 

Applications to understanding human behaviour 
Although human attachment is very diff erent from that in birds there have been attempts to use the idea that some kind of ‘imprinting’ explains human behaviour. For example, Peter Seebach (2005) suggested that computer users exhibit ‘baby duck syndrome’ – which is the attachment formed to their fi rst computer operating system, leading them to reject others. 
Consider: To what extent is imprinting a useful idea in humans? 
Evaluation 
Real-world value 

One strength of Harlow’s research is its important real-world applications. 
For example, it has helped social workers and clinical psychologists understand that a lack of bonding experience may be a risk factor in child development allowing them to intervene to prevent poor outcomes (Howe 1998). We also now understand the importance of attachment fi gures for baby monkeys in zoos and breeding programmes in the wild. 
This means that the value of Harlow’s research is not just theoretical but also practical. 
Generalisability to humans 

One limitation of Harlow’s research is the ability to generalise fi ndings and conclusions from monkeys to humans. 
Rhesus monkeys are much more similar to humans than Lorenz’s birds, and all mammals share some common attachment behaviours. However, the human brain and human behaviour is still more complex than that of monkeys. 
This means that it may not be appropriate to generalise Harlow’s fi ndings to humans. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Ethical issues 

Harlow’s research caused severe and long-term distress to the monkeys. However, his fi ndings and conclusions have important theoretical and practical applications. 
Consider: On balance should Harlow have carried out his research and should we make use of it? 
The plain-wire and cloth-covered mothers used in Harlow’s study. In this photo the feeding bottle is attached to the plain-wire mother but for some of the monkeys the bottle was on the cloth-covered mother. 
Deprivation damages brains 

Follow-up studies have replicated Harlow’s ÿ ndings and, in addition, autopsies have been carried out on the deprived monkeys to see whether their deprivation caused any physical changes in their developing brains. A researcher is interested in levels of two brain chemicals (serotonin and oxytocin) in the monkey brains. She measures the levels of each chemical extracted from the brains of deprived and control monkeys. 
Questions 

1. 
State the aim of this study. (2 marks) 


2. 
Write a non-directional hypothesis for this study. (2 marks) 

3. 
Explain the difference between an aim and a hypothesis. (2 marks) 



Study tip 

You need to know about both Harlow’s animal research and Lorenz’s animal research in a fair amount of detail. It helps to be able to divide your description into the procedures and the f ndings, as we have done on the facing page. And try to learn specif c details. 
Check it 

1. 
Outline how Lorenz studied attachment using animals. [4 marks] 

2. 
Describe one study where Harlow used animals to investigate attachment. [4 marks] 

3. 
Brie° y evaluate Harlow’s animal studies. [4 marks] 

4. 
Describe and evaluate animal studies of attachment. 



[12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 
 Animal studies of attachment // 81 

Explanations of attachment: Learning theory 
The specification says… 
Explanations of attachment: learning theory. 

Psychologists seek to explain behaviour. One popular explanation for attachment in the 1950s was learning theory 
– the view that attachments develop through classical and/or operant conditioning (described on page 108). 
Key term 

Learning theory˜A set of theories from the behaviourist approach to psychology, that emphasise the role of learning in the acquisition of behaviour. Explanations for learning of behaviour include classical and operant conditioning. 

Classical conditioning of a˜ achment 

Unconditioned stimulus Unconditioned response 
Food Pleasure 

Neutral stimulus  No response  
Caregiver  
Unconditioned + neutral stimulus  Unconditioned response  

Food             +         Caregiver Pleasure 

Conditioned stimulus  Conditioned response 
Caregiver Pleasure 
Baby food – is that really all there is to love? 
Sampling 

A team of attachment researchers are interested in whether feeding in° uences attachment. The team believe that mothers and babies who have difÿ culty breastfeeding are less likely to develop good quality attachments. They ask for volunteers from a hospital where mothers who struggle with breastfeeding attend feeding support groups. At one year from birth these mother–baby pairs are assessed for attachment. 
Questions 

1. 
Explain what is meant by a volunteer sample. (2 marks) 


2. 
Identify two strengths of using a volunteer sample in this study. (2 marks) 

3. 
Explain one limitation of volunteer sampling. (2 marks) 


4. 
A better (more representative) sample could be obtained by random sampling. Explain how the researchers in the above study might obtain a random sample. (4 marks) 


Learning theory and attachment 
Learning theorists John Dollard and Neal Miller (1950) proposed that caregiver– infant attachment can be explained by learning theory. Their approach is sometimes called a ‘cupboard love’ approach because it emphasises the importance of the attachment fi gure as a provider of food. Put simply they proposed that children learn to love whoever feeds them! 
Classical conditioning 
Classical conditioning involves learning to associate two stimuli together so that we begin to respond to one in the same way as we already respond to the other. In the case of attachment, food serves as an unconditioned stimulus. Being fed gives us pleasure – we don’t have to learn that, it is an unconditioned response. 
A caregiver starts as a neutral stimulus, i.e. something that produces no response. However, when the caregiver provides food over time they become associated with food. When the baby then sees this person there is an expectation of food. The neutral stimulus has become a conditioned stimulus. Once conditioning has taken place the sight of the caregiver produces a conditioned response of pleasure. To a learning theorist this conditioned pleasure response is love, i.e. an attachment is formed and the caregiver becomes an attachment fi gure. 
Operant conditioning 
Operant conditioning involves learning from the consequences of behaviour. If a behaviour produces a pleasant consequence, that behaviour is likely to be repeated again. The behaviour is said to be reinforced. If a behaviour produces an unpleasant consequence (punishment) it is less likely to be repeated. 
Operant conditioning can explain why babies cry for comfort – an important behaviour in building attachment. Crying leads to a response from the caregiver, for example feeding. As long as the caregiver provides the correct response, crying is reinforced. The baby then directs crying for comfort towards the caregiver who responds with comforting ‘social suppressor’ behaviour. 
This reinforcement is a two-way process. At the same time as the baby is reinforced for crying, the caregiver receives negative reinforcement because the crying stops – escaping from something unpleasant is reinforcing. This interplay of mutual reinforcement strengthens an attachment. 
Attachment as a secondary drive 
As well as conditioning, learning theory draws on the concept of drive reduction. Hunger can be thought of as a primary drive – it’s an innate, biological motivator. We are motivated to eat in order to reduce the hunger drive. 
Robert Sears et al. (1957) suggested that, as caregivers provide food, the primary drive of hunger becomes generalised to them. Attachment is thus a secondary drive learned by an association between the caregiver and the satisfaction of a primary drive. 
Angus’s choice 
Angus is a baby. His family is very well off and his mother has enlisted the help of a nanny to help with practical care. Angus is bottle-fed and most of his feeds are given by the nanny. Angus’s mother works part-time so Angus spends approximately the same number of hours a week with his mother as he does with the nanny. The nanny is mostly interested in practical care whereas when Angus’s mother is with him she plays with him and spends a lot of time cuddling. 
Questions 
1. 
Angus’s mother is concerned that he will get more attached to the nanny because she usually feeds him. Based on your understanding of learning theory should Angus’s mother be worried? 

2. 
Now read the evaluations of the learning theory account of attachment. How would you explain to Angus’s mother that she might not need to worry? Refer to psychological evidence. 


Ethical issues in infant research 

Psychologists are concerned with ethical issues in their research. Sometimes the obvious way to gather data raises really serious issues. 
A group of psychologists are interested in which is more important when it comes to forming attachments with adults – feeding or cuddling babies. The psychologists come up with the following experimental design: they will ask the parent who does most of the feeding to stop cuddling their baby. They will ask the other parent to do no feeding but provide comfort and cuddles. A year later the researchers will assess how strongly attached the baby is to each parent. 


Explanations of attachment: Bowlby’s theory 
The specification says… 
Explanations of attachment: Bowlby’s monotropic 
theory. The concepts of a critical period and an 
internal working model. 

The specif cation identif es a second explanation for the formation of attachment – Bowlby’s theory, which has become the dominant theory of attachment in psychology. 
Key terms 

Monotropic˜A term sometimes used to describe Bowlby’s theory. Mono means ‘one’ and tropic means ‘leaning towards’. This indicates that one particular attachment is di. erent from all others and of central importance to a child’s development. 
Critical period˜The time within which an attachment must form if it is to form at all. Lorenz and Harlow noted that attachment in birds and monkeys had critical periods. Bowlby extended the idea to humans, proposing that human babies have a sensitive period after which it will be much more di.  cult to form an attachment. 
Internal working model˜Our mental representations of the world, e.g. the representation we have of our relationship to our primary attachment f gure. This model a. ects our future relationships because it carries our perception of what relationships are like. 
Babies’ smiles are ‘social releasers’. They elicit innate attachment behaviours from adults. 
Bowlby’s monotropic theory 
John Bowlby (1988) rejected learning theory as an explanation for attachment because, as he said, ‘were it true, an infant of a year or two should take readily to whomever feeds him and this is clearly not the case’. Instead Bowlby looked at the work of Lorenz and Harlow for ideas and proposed an evolutionary explanation – that attachment was an innate system that gives a survival advantage. So attachment, like imprinting, evolved as a mechanism to keep young animals safe by ensuring they stay close to adult caregivers. 
Monotropy 
Bowlby’s theory (1958, 1969) is described as monotropic because he placed great emphasis on a child’s attachment to one particular caregiver (hence the word mono). He believed that the child’s attachment to this one caregiver is diff erent and more important than others. Bowlby called this person the ‘mother’ but it was clear that it need not be the biological mother (or indeed a woman). Bowlby believed that the more time a baby spent with this mother-fi gure – or primary attachment fi gure as we usually call them now – the better. He put forward two principles to clarify this: 
• 
The law of continuity stated that the more constant and predictable a child’s care, the better the quality of their attachment. 

• 
The law of accumulated separation stated that the eff ects of every separation from the mother add up ‘and the safest dose is therefore a zero dose’ (Bowlby 1975). 


Social releasers and the critical period 
Bowlby suggested that babies are born with a set of innate ‘cute’ behaviours like smiling, cooing and gripping that encourage attention from adults. He called these social releasers because their purpose is to activate adult social interaction and so make an adult attach to the baby. Bowlby recognised that attachment was a reciprocal process. Both mother and baby are ‘hard-wired’ to become attached. 
The interplay between baby and adult attachment systems gradually builds the relationship between baby and caregiver, beginning in the early weeks of life (as we discussed on page 74). Bowlby proposed that there is a critical period around six months when the infant attachment system is active. In fact Bowlby viewed this as more of a sensitive period. A child is maximally sensitive at six months and this possibly extends up to the age of two. If an attachment is not formed in this time, a child will fi nd it much harder to form one later. 
Internal working model 
Bowlby proposed that a child forms a mental representation of their relationship with their primary attachment fi gure. This is called an internal working model because it serves as a model for what relationships are like. 
A child whose fi rst experience is of a loving relationship with a reliable caregiver will tend to form an expectation that all relationships are as loving and reliable, and they will bring these qualities to future relationships. However, a child whose fi rst relationship involves poor treatment will tend to form further poor relationships in which they expect such treatment from others and/or treat others in that way. 
Most importantly the internal working model aff ects the child’s later ability to be a parent themselves. People tend to base their parenting behaviour on their own experiences of being parented. This explains why children from functional families tend to have similar families themselves. 
Bibi and Amir 
Bowlby identiÿ ed a critical period after which human children cannot easily form a secure attachment. 
Bibi and Amir are considering adopting a child. They have made contact with a potential adoptee with a troubled past. The boy, Hugo, is now four years old. For his ÿ rst two years Hugo lived with an abusive family and never formed a proper attachment. 
Question 
Based on your understanding of the ideas of a critical period, what advice might you give Bibi and Amir? 
Meta-analysis 
Heidi Bailey et al. (2007, see facing page) looked at how consistent attachment quality was in three generations of families. Marinus van IJzendoorn (1995) carried out a meta-analysis of the results of 18 similar studies covering a total of 854 parents. 
Results strongly supported the idea that well-attached parents tend to have children with good attachments. This suggests that attachment quality is transmitted from one generation to the next. 
Questions 

1. 
Explain what is meant by meta-analysis. (2 marks) 

2. 
Explain the difference between a meta-analysis and a review. (2 marks) 

3. 
Explain one strength of meta-analysis as a research method. (2 marks) 


4. 
Explain how this research supports the internal working model. (3 marks) 



Types of attachment 
The specification says… 
Ainsworth’s ‘Strange Situation’. Types of attachment: secure, insecure-avoidant and insecure-resistant. 

Mary Ainsworth worked with John Bowlby on the development of attachment theory. Her particular contribution was to produce a method, still used today, to assess the quality of attachment between a baby and others. This method of assessment is called the Strange Situation. 
Key terms 

Strange Situation˜A controlled observation designed to test attachment security. Babies are assessed on their response to playing in an unfamiliar room, being left alone, left with a stranger and being reunited with a caregiver. 
Secure attachment˜Generally thought of as the most desirable attachment type, associated with psychologically healthy outcomes. In the Strange Situation this is shown by moderate stranger and separation anxiety and ease of comfort at reunion. 
Insecure–avoidant attachment˜An attachment type characterised by low anxiety but weak attachment. In the Strange Situation this is shown by low stranger and separation anxiety and little response to reunion, maybe even an avoidance of the caregiver. 
Insecure–resistant attachment˜An attachment type characterised by strong attachment and high anxiety. In the Strange Situation this is shown by high levels of stranger and separation 


Ainsworth’s ‘Strange Situation’ 






















The Strange Situation was developed by Mary Ainsworth and Silvia Bell (1970). The aim was to be able to observe key attachment behaviours as a means of assessing the quality of a baby’s attachment to a caregiver. 

The Strange Situation is a controlled observation procedure designed to measure the security of attachment a baby displays towards a caregiver. It takes place in a room with quite controlled conditions (i.e. a laboratory) with a two-way mirror and/or cameras through which psychologists can observe the baby’s behaviour. 
The behaviours used to judge attachment included: 
• 
Proximity-seeking – a baby with a good quality attachment will stay fairly close to a caregiver. 

• 
Exploration and secure-base behaviour – good attachment enables a baby to feel confident to explore, using their caregiver as a secure base, i.e. a point of contact that will make them feel safe. 

• 
Stranger anxiety – one of the signs of becoming closely attached is a display of anxiety when a stranger approaches. 

• 
Separation anxiety – another sign of becoming attached is to protest at separation from the caregiver. 

• 
Response to reunion – babies who are securely attached greet the caregiver’s return with pleasure and seek comfort. 


The procedure has seven episodes, each of which lasts three minutes. 
Beginning: Caregiver and baby enter an unfamiliar playroom.  
1. The baby is encouraged to explore.  Tests exploration and secure base.  
2. A stranger comes in, talks to the caregiver and approaches the baby.  Tests stranger anxiety.  
3. The caregiver leaves the baby and stranger together.  Tests separation and stranger anxiety.  
4. The caregiver returns and the stranger leaves.  Tests reunion behaviour and exploration/secure base.  
5. The caregiver leaves the baby alone.  Tests separation anxiety.  
6. The stranger returns.  Tests stranger anxiety.  
7. The caregiver returns and is reunited with the baby.  Tests reunion behaviour.  


Findings – types of attachment 


















Ainsworth et al. (1978) found that there were distinct patterns in the way that babies behaved. They identified three main types of attachment: 
• 
Secure attachment (Type B). These babies explore happily but regularly go back to their caregiver (proximity-seeking and secure-base behaviour). They usually show moderate separation distress and moderate stranger anxiety. Securely attached babies require and accept comfort from the caregiver in the reunion stage. About 60–75% of British babies are classified as secure. 

• 
Insecure–avoidant attachment (Type A). These babies explore freely but do not seek proximity or show secure-base behaviour. They show little or no reaction when their caregiver leaves and little stranger anxiety. They make little effort to make contact when the caregiver returns and may even avoid such contact. About 20–25% of British babies are classified as insecure–avoidant. 

• 
Insecure–resistant attachment (Type C). These babies seek greater proximity than others and so explore less. They show high levels of stranger and separation distress but they resist comfort when reunited with their caregiver. Around 3% of British babies are classified as insecure–resistant. 






Secure  Insecure– avoidant  Insecure– resistant  
Proximity-seeking  
Exploration/secure base  
Stranger anxiety  
Separation anxiety  
Response on reunion  


learned about the Strange Situation. She is confused about what behaviours go with each type of attachment. So she creates the table on the right. 
Task 

Fill in her table using words like ‘high’ or ‘low’, ‘strong’, etc. 

Evaluation 
Good predictive validity 

One strength of the Strange Situation is that its outcome predicts a number of aspects of the baby’s later development. 
A large body of research has shown that babies and toddlers assessed as Type B (secure) tend to have better outcomes than others, both in later childhood and in adulthood. In childhood this includes better achievement in school and less involvement in bullying (McCormick et al. 2016, Kokkinos 2007). Securely attached babies also tend to go on to have better mental health in adulthood (Ward et al. 2006). Those babies assessed as having insecure–resistant attachment and those not falling into Types A, B or C tend to have the worst outcomes. 
This suggests that the Strange Situation measures something real and meaningful in a baby’s development. 
Counterpoint The Strange Situation clearly measures something 
important that is associated with later development. However, not all 
psychologists believe this something is attachment. For example, Jerome 
Kagan (1982) suggested that genetically-infl uenced anxiety levels could 
account for variations in attachment behaviour in the Strange Situation 
and later development. 

This means that the Strange Situation may not actually measure 
attachment. 
Good reliability 

A further strength of the Strange Situation is good inter-rater reliability (the agreement between diff erent observers). 
Johanna Bick et al. (2012) tested inter-rater reliability for the Strange Situation for a team of trained observers and found agreement on attachment type in 94% of cases. This high level of reliability may be because the procedure takes place under controlled conditions and because behaviours (such as proximity-seeking and stranger anxiety) involve large movements and are therefore easy to observe. For example, anxious babies cry and crawl away from strangers. 
This means that we can be confi dent that attachment type as assessed by the Strange Situation does not depend on subjective judgements. 
The test may be culture-bound 

One limitation of the Strange Situation is that it may not be a valid measure of attachment in diff erent cultural contexts. 
The Strange Situation was developed in Britain and the US. It may be culture-bound, i.e. only valid for use in certain cultures (in this case Europe and the US). One reason for this is that babies have diff erent experiences in diff erent cultures and these experiences may aff ect their responses to the Strange Situation. For example, in one Japanese study by Keiko Takahashi (1986), babies displayed very high levels of separation anxiety and so a disproportionate number were classifi ed as insecure–resistant. Takahashi (1990) suggests that this anxiety response was not due to high rates of attachment insecurity but to the unusual nature of the experience in Japan where mother–baby separation is very rare. 
This means that it is very di.  cult to know what the Strange Situation is measuring when used outside Europe and the US. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Other attachment types 

Mary Main and Judith Solomon (1986) identifi ed a fourth category of attachment – a disorganised or Type D attachment, a mix of resistant and avoidant behaviours. 
However, Type D babies are unusual and have generally experienced some form of severe neglect or abuse. Most will go on to develop psychological disorders by adulthood. 
Consider: To what extent does Ainsworth’s classiÿ cation of attachment types hold up in the face of the existence of Type Ds? 
Ainsworth’s attachment types have been shown to be good predictors of future behaviour. 
Sampling 

The Strange Situation is a controlled observation procedure. It takes just over 20 minutes and involves time sampling – every 15 seconds observers noted what behaviours were being displayed. The alternative to time sampling is event sampling. 
The Strange Situation involves non-participant observation. The alternative is participant observation in which observers inÿ ltrate the situation being observed and take part in the observed activity. 
Questions 
1. 
Explain one advantage of time sampling over event sampling. (2 marks) 

2. 
Explain why non-participant observation is appropriate for the Strange Situation. (2 marks) 


James’s f rst visit to his childminder 
James is a one-year-old boy whose parents are both psychologists. 
They have decided to send James to a childminder so that his 
mother, Ruth, can return to work part-time. The ÿ rst time James 
meets the childminder Ruth introduces them and encourages James 
to play in the playroom. James explores a little but regularly comes 
back to Ruth. Ruth then leaves the room for a few minutes. James 
is upset when Ruth leaves and is wary of the childminder but he is 
overjoyed when Ruth comes back in and accepts comfort readily 
from her. When James’s father calls later to ask how the visit went, 
Ruth says ‘Great. He’s securely attached!’ 
Question 
Based on your understanding of attachment types, explain what 
Ruth meant by this and why she judged James to have a secure 
attachment. 
Check it 
1. Describe how Ainsworth studied types of attachment. 

[6 marks] 
2. 
Outline what is meant by a ‘secure attachment’. [3 marks] 

3. 
Explain the difference in behaviours between a baby who is classiÿ ed as insecure–avoidant and one who is classiÿ ed as insecure–resistant. [4 marks] 

4. 
Describe and evaluate the Strange Situation as a method of assessing attachment type. 



[12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 
 Types of attachment // 87 

Cultural variations in attachment 
The specification says… 
Cultural variations in attachment, including 
van IJzendoorn. 
Child-rearing styles vary across di. erent cultures. The question is how these might impact on the proportions of di. erent attachment types in di. erent countries. It might be that attachment types are the same across the world or they might be di. erent. We look in detail at the classic meta-analysis of cultural di. erences by van IJzendoorn. 
Key term 
Cultural variations˜‘Culture’ refers to the norms and values that exist within any group of people. Cultural variations then are the di. erences in norms and values that exist between people in di. erent groups. In attachment research we are concerned with the di. erences in the proportion of children of di. erent attachment types. 
Proportions of secure, avoidant and resistant babies in van IJzendoorn and Kroonenberg’s meta-analysis. 
insecure–resistant 
insecure–avoidant 
secure 
100% 
90% 
80% 
70% 
60% 
50% 
40% 
30% 
Studies of cultural variations 
van IJzendoorn and Kroonenberg’s research 
Marinus van IJzendoorn and Pieter Kroonenberg (1988) conducted a study to look at the proportions of secure, insecure–avoidant and insecure–resistant attachments across a range of countries to assess cultural variation. They also looked at the diff erences within the same countries to get an idea of variations within a culture. 
Procedure The researchers located 32 studies of attachment where the Strange Situation had been used to investigate the proportions of babies with diff erent attachment types. These were conducted in eight countries – 15 were in the US. Overall the studies yielded results for 1,990 children. The data for these 32 studies was meta-analysed. This means that the results of the studies were combined and analysed together, weighting each study for its sample size. 
Findings The fi ndings are shown in the graph below left . There was wide variation between the proportions of attachment types in diff erent studies. In all countries secure attachment was the most common classifi cation. However the proportion varied from 75% in Britain to 50% in China. 
In individualist cultures rates of insecure–resistant attachment were similar to Ainsworth’s original sample (all under 14%) but this was not true for the collectivist samples from China, Japan and Israel where rates were above 25% (and where rates of insecure–avoidant attachment were reduced). 
An interesting fi nding was that variations between results of studies within the same country were actually 150% greater than those between countries. In the US, for example, one study found only 46% securely attached compared to one sample as high as 90%. 
Other studies of cultural variations 
An Italian study Alessandra Simonelli et al. (2014) conducted a study in Italy to see whether the proportions of babies of diff erent attachment types still matches those found in previous studies. The researchers assessed 76 babies aged 12 months using the Strange Situation. 
They found 50% were secure, with 36% insecure–avoidant. This is a lower rate of secure attachment and higher rate of insecure–avoidant attachment than has been found in many studies. The researchers suggest this is because increasing numbers of mothers of very young children work long hours and use professional childcare. 
These fi ndings suggest that patterns of attachment types are not static but vary in line with cultural change. 
A Korean study Mi Kyoung Jin et al. (2012) conducted a study to compare the proportions of attachment types in Korea to other studies. The Strange Situation was used to assess 87 babies. 
The overall proportions of insecure and secure babies were similar to those in most countries, with most babies being secure. However, more of those classifi ed as insecurely attached were resistant and only one baby was avoidant. This distribution is similar to the distribution of attachment types found in Japan (van IJzendoorn and Kroonenberg 1988). 
20% 
10% 
Great Britain Sweden Japan Netherlands United States IsraelGermany China 
Since Japan and Korea have quite similar child-rearing styles this similarity might be 
explained in terms of child-rearing style. 
Conclusions 
Helga’s worried 
The proportion of babies classiÿ ed with each attachment type differs between nationalities. Helga and Lars have recently moved to England from Germany with their son Kurt. They take part in some attachment research at their local university and are disturbed to hear that Kurt has an insecure–avoidant attachment. 
Question 
Should Helga and Lars be concerned by this? Refer to the proportions of German children of each attachment type in the van.IJzendoorn study. 
Secure attachment seems to be the norm in a wide range of cultures, supporting Bowlby’s idea that attachment is innate and universal and this type is the universal norm. However, the research also clearly shows that cultural practices have an infl uence on attachment type. 
Pilot studies 
A team of psychologists are interested in cultural variations in attachment. They want to see if the Strange Situation works as a test of attachment security in a range of countries including some where attachment type has not been assessed before. They decide to carry out a pilot study in these countries. 
Questions 
1. 
Outline what is meant by a pilot study. (2 marks) 

2. 
Why is it advisable to carry out a pilot study before using a test on a new population? (2 marks) 




Bowlby’s theory of maternal deprivation 






















































likely confounding variables? In other words what sort of things might co-occur with deprivation that might in°uence social development? (2 marks) 

90 //  Chapter 3 Attachment 
Evaluation 
Flawed evidence 

One limitation of the theory of maternal deprivation is the poor quality of the evidence it is based on. 
Bowlby’s 44 thieves study (facing page) is fl awed because it was Bowlby himself who carried out both the family interviews and the assessments for aff ectionless psychopathy. This left  him open to bias because he knew in advance which teenagers he expected to show signs of psychopathy. Other sources of evidence were equally fl awed. For example, Bowlby was also infl uenced by the fi ndings of Goldfarb’s (1943) research on the development of deprived children in wartime orphanages. This study has problems of confounding variables because the children in Goldfarb’s study had experienced early trauma and institutional care as well as prolonged separation from their primary caregivers. 
This means that Bowlby’s original sources of evidence for maternal deprivation had serious fl aws and would not be taken seriously as evidence nowadays. 
Counterpoint A new line of research has provided some modest support for 
the idea that maternal deprivation can have long-term eff ects. Frederic Lévy et al. 
(2003) showed that separating baby rats from their mother for as little as a day 
had a permanent eff ect on their social development though not other aspects of 
development. 

This means that, although Bowlby relied on fl awed evidence to support the theory 
of maternal deprivation, there are other sources of evidence for his ideas. 
Deprivation and privation 

Another limitation of Bowlby’s theory of maternal deprivation is his confusion between diff erent types of early experience. 
Michael Rutter (1981) drew an important distinction between two types of early negative experience. Deprivation strictly refers to the loss of the primary attachment fi gure aft er attachment has developed. On the other hand privation is the failure to form any attachment in the fi rst place – this may take place when children are brought up in institutional care. Rutter pointed out that the severe long-term damage Bowlby associated with deprivation is actually more likely to be the result of privation. So the children studied by Goldfarb may actually have been ‘prived’ rather than deprived. Similarly, many of the children in the 44 thieves study had disrupted early lives (e.g. spells in hospital) and may never have formed strong attachments. 
This means that Bowlby may have overestimated the seriousness of the eff ects of deprivation in children’s development. 
Critical versus sensitive periods 

A further limitation of the theory is Bowlby’s idea of a critical period. 
For Bowlby, damage was inevitable if a child had not formed an attachment in the fi rst two-and-a-half years of life. Hence this is a critical period. However, there is evidence to suggest that in many cases good quality aft ercare can prevent most or all of this damage. For example Jarmila Koluchová (1976) reported the case of the Czech Twins. The twins experienced very severe physical and emotional abuse from the age of 18 months up until they were seven years old. Although they were severely damaged emotionally by their experience they received excellent care and by their teens they had recovered fully. 
This means that lasting harm is not inevitable even in cases of severe privation. The ‘critical period’ is therefore better seen as a ‘sensitive period’. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Conf icting evidence 

Most attempts to replicate the 44 thieves study failed to produce similar results. For example, Hilda Lewis (1954) looked at 500 young people and found no association between early separation and later psychopathy (criminality or relationship di.  culties). 
On the other hand, more recent research (for example, Gao et al. 2010) has partially supported Bowlby by showing that poor quality maternal care was associated with high rates of psychopathy in adults. 
Consider: In the light of this con. icting evidence, how seriously should we take maternal deprivation as an explanation for abnormal development (psychopathy)? 
Teenagers who experienced maternal deprivation are not necessarily more likely to be criminals. 
Maternal deprivation as a legal defence 

Maternal deprivation has been associated with criminality, in particular criminality involving no empathy or guilt. 
Simon is a habitual criminal. Since his early teens he has stolen many car stereos and shoplifted. More recently he has turned to burglary and violent crime. Simon is now in court for mugging a 75-year-old woman. Simon studied psychology and as his defence mentions his mother’s long spell in hospital when he was a baby. 
Questions 
1. 
How could Simon use the theory of maternal deprivation to excuse his actions? 

2. 
Referring to the evaluations of the theory of maternal deprivation, explain why Simon might be unwise to use this defence. 


A deprivation study 
Goldfarb (1955) followed up 30 orphaned children to the age of 12. Half of the original sample had been fostered by four months of age whilst the other half remained in an orphanage. At 12 their IQs were assessed using a standard IQ test called the Stanford-Binet test. It was found that the fostered group had an average IQ of 96 whereas the group that remained in the orphanage averaged only 68, below the cut-off point used to defi ne intellectual disability. 
Question 
Using Bowlby’s theory of maternal deprivation, explain Goldfarb’s results. 
Check it 
1. Explain what is meant by ‘maternal deprivation’. 

[3 marks] 
2. 
According to Bowlby, prolonged separation from the mother or mother-substitute can have serious effects on children’s psychological development. Outline two effects that maternal deprivation can have on children’s psychological development. [4 marks] 

3. 
Explain one limitation of Bowlby’s theory of maternal deprivation. [4 marks] 

4. 
Describe and evaluate Bowlby’s theory of maternal deprivation. [12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 


 Bowlby’s theory of maternal deprivation // 91 

Romanian orphan studies: Institutionalisation 
The specification says… 
Romanian orphan studies: effects of institutionalisation. 

The theory of maternal deprivation predicted that long term negative e.ects result from early deprivation. This can be studied in the context of institutional care. Research on emotional deprivation in the 1940s and 1950s showed the harm it caused. This meant that institutional care for young children largely disappeared, and therefore research opportunities ceased to exist. 
Key terms 

Orphan studies˜These concern children placed in care because their parents cannot look after them.  An orphan is a child whose parents have either died or have abandoned them permanently. 
Institutionalisation˜A term for the e.ects of living in an institutional setting. The term ‘institution’ refers to a place like a hospital or an orphanage where people live for long, continuous periods of time. In such places there is often very little emotional care provided. In attachment research we are interested in the e.ects of institutional care on children’s attachment and subsequent development. 

In Rutter’s research on Romanian orphans it was found that there was a negative correlation between age at adoption and intellectual development (IQ score) at age 4. 
Questions 
1. 
Brie°y explain the difference between a correlation and an experiment. (2 marks) 

2. 
Explain why you might expect to obtain a negative correlation in this study. (2 marks) 

3. 
Sketch a scattergram showing what the results might 






Evaluation 
Real-world application 

One strength of the Romanian orphanage studies is their application to improve conditions for children growing up outside their family home. 
Studying the Romanian orphans has improved psychologists’ understanding of the eff ects of early institutional care and how to prevent the worst of these eff ects (Langton 2006). This has led to improvements in the conditions experienced by looked-aft er children, i.e. children growing up in the care system. For example children’s homes now avoid having large numbers of caregivers for each child. Instead the children tend to have one or two ‘key workers’ who play a central role in their emotional care. Also institutional care is now seen as an undesirable option for looked-aft er children. Considerable eff ort is made to accommodate such children in foster care or to have them adopted instead. 
This means that children in institutional care have a chance to develop normal attachments and disinhibited attachment is avoided. 
Fewer confounding variables 

Another strength of the Romanian studies is the lack of confounding variables. 
There were many orphan studies before the Romanian orphans became available to study (e.g. orphans studied during the Second World War). Many of the children studied in orphanages had experienced varying degrees of trauma, and it is di.  cult to disentangle the eff ects of neglect, physical abuse and bereavement from those of institutional care. However the children from Romanian orphanages had, in the main, been handed over by loving parents who could not aff ord to keep them. 
This means that results were much less likely to be confounded by other negative early experiences (higher internal validity). 
Counterpoint On the other hand, studying children from Romanian 
orphanages might have introduced diff erent confounding variables. The quality of 
care in these institutions was remarkably poor, with children receiving very little 
intellectual stimulation or comfort. 

This means that the harmful eff ects seen in studies of Romanian orphans may 
represent the eff ects of poor institutional care rather than institutional care per se. 
Lack of adult data 

One limitation of the Romanian orphanage studies is the current lack of data on adult development. 
The latest data from the ERA Study looked at the children in their early- to mid­20s. This means that we do not currently have data to answer some of the most interesting research questions about the long-term eff ects of early institutional care. These research questions include the lifetime prevalence of mental health problems and participants’ success in forming and maintaining adult romantic and parental relationships. It will take a long time to gather this data because of the longitudinal design of the study, i.e. the same participants are followed over a long period. 
This means it will be some time before we know more completely what the long­term eff ects are for the Romanian orphans. It is possible that late-adopted children may ‘catch up’. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Social sensitivity 

The Romanian orphan studies are socially sensitive because the results show that late-adopted children typically have poor developmental outcomes. Results have been published while the children have been growing up, meaning that their parents, teachers and anyone else who knew them might have lowered their expectations and treated the adopted children diff erently. This might even have created a self-fulfi lling prophecy. 
On the other hand, much has been learned from the Romanian orphan studies that might benefi t future institutionalised or potentially institutionalised children. 
Consider: Should the results of the Romanian orphan studies have been published? 
The Romanian orphanages may have been of such bad quality that results cannot be generalised to other institutions. 
Nadia 

Nadia was adopted when she was two years old. Prior to this she had lived in a home for orphans. Now at the age of 11 she is doing well at school but her parents and teachers have noticed that she has a tendency to be attention-seeking with familiar people and strangers. Her adoptive parents wonder if this could be related to her early experiences before being adopted. 
Question 

Referring to the effects of institutionalisation, explain why Nadia may be showing this unusual social behaviour. 
Irena 

Irena was adopted by British parents when she was two months old. She had lived for most of her life prior to this in a poor quality Romanian orphanage. At the age of 16 she did less well in her GCSEs than most of her friends. A family friend (actually a pretty rubbish friend) says to Irena’s adoptive mother ‘what can you expect with her background?’. 
Question 

Referring to what you know about the intellectual development of Romanian orphans adopted in Britain, what would you say to the family friend? 
Check it 

1. 
Brie° y outline what is meant by ‘institutionalisation’. [2 marks] 

2. 
Outline what research has found about the effects of ‘institutionalisation’ on attachment. [6 marks] 

3. 
Describe and evaluate research (theories and/or studies) into Romanian orphans. 



[12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 
 Romanian orphan studies: Institutionalisation // 93 


Influence of early attachment on later relationships 
The specification says… 

Procedure – They analysed 620 replies to a ‘love quiz’ printed in an and interviews 




American local newspaper. The quiz had three sections. The first assessed respondents’ current or most important relationship. The second part assessed general love experiences such as number of partners. The third section assessed attachment type by asking respondents to choose which of three statements best described their feelings. 
Findings and conclusion – 56% of respondents were identified as securely attached, with 25% insecure–avoidant and 19% insecure–resistant. Those reporting secure attachments were the most likely to have good and longer-lasting romantic experiences. The avoidant respondents tended to reveal jealousy and fear of intimacy. These findings suggest that patterns of attachment behaviour are reflected in romantic relationships. 
94 //  Chapter 3 Attachment 
Research into the quality of peer and romantic relationships and attachment requires self-reporting of attitudes towards and experiences of relationships. This can be done by means of interviews or questionnaires. Interviews can be structured or unstructured. The kinds of interviews used to assess relationship quality are usually structured. 
Questions 
1. 
Explain how you might use both a questionnaire and an interview to assess the quality of peer relationships. (2 marks) 

2. 
Why would psychologists usually use a structured interview to assess relationship quality? (2 marks) 

3. 
Explain why you might use closed questions in your interview. (2 marks) 


Evaluation 
Research support 

One strength of the research into attachment and later relationships is supporting evidence. 
We have looked at studies linking attachment to later development. Reviews of such evidence (e.g. Fearon and Roisman 2017) have concluded that early attachment consistently predicts later attachment, emotional well-being and attachment to own children. How strong the relationship is between early attachment type and later development depends both on the attachment type and the aspect of later development. So whilst insecure–avoidant attachment seems to convey fairly mild disadvantages for any aspect of development, disorganised attachment is strongly associated with later mental disorder. 
This means that secure attachment as a baby appears to convey advantages for future development while disorganised attachment appears to seriously disadvantage children. 
Counterpoint Not all evidence supports the existence of close links between 
early attachment and later development. For example the Regensburg longitudinal 
study (Becker-Stoll et al. 2008) followed 43 individuals from one year of age. At age 
16 attachment was assessed using the adult attachment interview and there was 
no evidence of continuity.  

This means that it is not clear to what extent the quality of early attachment 
really predicts later development. There may be other important factors. 
Validity issues with retrospective studies 
One limitation of most research into the infl uence of attachment is that early attachment is assessed retrospectively. 
Most research on the link between early attachment and later development are not longitudinal (i.e. they don’t assess attachment in early life and then revisit the same person later in life). Instead researchers usually ask adolescent or adult participants questions about their relationship with parents, and identify attachment type from this. This causes two validity problems. First, asking questions relies on the honesty and accurate perception of the participants. Second, it means it is very hard to know whether what is being assessed is early attachment or in fact adult attachment (see evidence from the Regensburg longitudinal study above). 
This means that the measures of early attachment used in most studies may be confounded with other factors making them meaningless. 
Confounding variables 

A further limitation of studies into the infl uence of early attachment on later development is the existence of confounding variables. 
Some studies do assess attachment in infancy (e.g. McCarthy on facing page), which means that the assessment of early attachment is valid. However, even these studies may have validity problems because associations between attachment quality and later development may be aff ected by confounding variables. For example parenting style may infl uence both attachment quality and later development. Alternatively genetically-infl uenced personality may be an infl uence on both factors. 
This means that we can never be entirely sure that it is early attachment and not some other factor that is infl uencing later development. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Balancing opportunity and risk 

It seems likely that the infl uence of early attachment is probabilistic (Clarke and Clarke 1998). This means that an insecure attachment does not invariably cause increased risk of later developmental problems – no one is inevitably going to have unsuccessful romantic relationships because of their early attachment experiences. It may be more likely but a host of other factors are involved. 
By knowing someone’s attachment status we have an opportunity to intervene and help their development. However, we may also become too pessimistic and create a self-fulfi lling prophecy. 
Consider: Is it better to know that a child is at increased risk of developmental problems as a result of insecure attachment or can this knowledge do more harm than good? 
Internal working models in social work 
Sarah works in Social Services assessing risk to children from parents who have been referred after issues have arisen with the quality of their parenting. Sarah has just received a new case – a neighbour of a family with a 10-year-old girl has complained that the child is being neglected. When Sarah interviews the mother about the family it emerges that the mother was neglected in her own childhood. 
Question 
Referring to internal working models, explain what Sarah might think about the origins of the alleged neglect. 
Internal working models in therapy 
Some types of psychological therapy make use of internal working models. 

Gary and Carly have just started relationship counselling. They have been together for a year but they have frequent rows. Carly feels that Gary is distant and wants to spend a lot of time alone. Gary says he is not used to intimacy. He also objects to Carly wanting to know where he is and starting rows. 
Gary and Carly have very different relationships with their parents. Gary’s mother was always fairly uninvolved and they are not close now. Carly says that her mother is argumentative and controlling. 
Question 

What might their therapist say about Gary’s and Carly’s internal working models? 
Check it 

1. 
Explain what is meant by an ‘internal working model’. [3 marks] 

2. 
Describe what psychological research has shown about the link between early attachment and adult relationships. [6 marks] 

3. 
Describe and evaluate research into the in° uence of attachment on childhood and adult relationships.  [12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 


 Influence of early attachment on later relationships // 95 
Practical corner 
The specification says… 
Knowledge and understanding of … research methods, practical research skills and maths skills. These should be developed through … ethical practical research activities. 

This means that you should conduct practical investigations wherever possible. For both practical and ethical reasons we don’t recommend you carry out practical work with young children, but there are relevant things you can do using your peers as participants, as suggested here. One practical activity uses observational techniques, the other involves questionnaires as the means of assessing the dependent variable in a quasi-experiment. 
Ethics check 
Ethics are discussed in detail on pages 178 179. We strongly suggest that you complete this checklist before collecting data. 
1. 
Do participants know participation is voluntary? 

2. 
Do participants know what to expect? 

3. 
Do participants know they can withdraw at any time? 

4. 
Are individuals’ results anonymous? 

5. 
Have I minimised the risk of distress to participants? 

6. 
Have I avoided asking sensitive questions? 

7. 
Will I avoid bringing my school/teacher/ psychology into disrepute? 

8. 
Have I considered all other ethical issues? 

9. 
Has my teacher approved this? 



Table 1 Synchronisation of NVC at 30-second intervals. y = synchronised  n = not synchronised 

30s  60s  90s  120s  150s  180s  210s  240s  
Smile/frown  n  n  y  y  n  y  y  y  
Gaze  n  n  n  y  y  n  y  y  
Hands  n  n  n  n  y  y  y  y  
Posture  n  n  n  n  n  y  y  y  
Total synchronised  0  0  1  2  2  3  4  4  


1. 
Identify two or more characteristics of good behavioural categories. (2 marks) 

2. 
What fraction of the scores in Table 1 are synchronised? (2 marks) 

3. 
Explain this statement ‘number of synchronised observations > number of not synchronised observations’. (1 mark) 

4. 
What conclusion would you reach based on the information in Table 1? (2 marks) 

5. 
Draw a scattergram to show the correlation between time spent in conversation and synchronisation. (3 marks) 

6. 
Draw a bar chart to represent the data in Table 1. (3 marks) 





Revision summaries 






wouldn’t form. 
Explanations of attachment: Learning theory 
Evaluation 

Cupboard love theory (Dollard and Miller). 
Real-world value 






Caregiver interactions facilitate attachment. 
Research 
Interactions 
Babies have frequent and important interactions with their caregiver. 
Reciprocity 
Turn-taking. 
Mothers respond when baby is alert. From 3 months becomes 
more intense and reciprocal. 
Interactional synchrony 
Same actions simultaneously. Interactions co-ordinated 
from two weeks (Meltzoff and Moore). Quality of attachment related 
to synchrony (Isabella et al.). 

Fathers’ contributions should not be overlooked. 
Research 
Attachment to fathers 
Most babies attach to their father, (75% by 18 months) but rarely as the first attachment (only 3% first sole attachment) (Schaffer and Emerson). 
Distinctive role for fathers 
Fathers may have a distinctive role involving play and stimulation (Grossmann et al.). 
Fathers as primary attachment figures 
Those fathers who were primary caregivers more responsive than secondary caregiver fathers (Field). 


The theory 
Classical conditioning 
Caregiver (neutral stimulus) associated with food (unconditioned stimulus). 
Caregiver becomes conditioned stimulus. 
Operant conditioning 
Crying behaviour reinforced positively for baby and negatively for caregiver. 
Attachment as a secondary drive 
Attachment becomes a secondary drive through association with hunger. 
Evaluation 
Filmed observations 
Capture fine detail, can establish inter-rater reliability and babies not aware of being observed. 
Di.culty observing babies 
Hard to know meaning of small movements. 
Developmental importance 
Observation of behaviour does not tell 
us about its importance in development. 
Counterpoint – evidence from e.g. 
Isabella et al. suggests interactional 
synchrony is important for attachment. 
Evaluation extra: Practical value versus ethics 
Attachment research has practical value but is controversial (implications for working mothers). 


Helps professionals (e.g. social workers) to promote bonding (Howe), also applied to zoos and breeding programmes. 



(Hay and Vespo). 

Confusion over research questions 
Competing research questions prevent a simple answer about the 
Goslings saw Lorenz when Baby monkeys given cloth­
father’s role. they hatched. covered or plain-wire ‘mother’ with feeding bottle attached. 
Conflicting evidence Findings 
Studies have reached different conclusions about a distinctive role Newly-hatched chicks attach Findings 
for fathers. to the first moving object Monkeys clung to cloth surrogate they see (imprinting). rather than wire one, regardless 
Counterpoint – fathers may be predisposed to a role but single of which dispensed milk. 
mothers and lesbian parents simply take on these roles. 
Sexual imprinting 

Real-world application Adult birds try to mate with Maternally deprived monkeys whatever species or object as adults 
Families can be advised about the father’s role in attachment. they imprint on. Grew up socially dysfunctional. 
Evaluation extra: Bias in this research The critical period for normal 
Preconceptions lead to observer bias, may affect some studies. 
development 
After 90 days attachments 
Scha˜er’s stages of attachment 

A classic study of the development of attachment. 
The theory 
Asocial stage 
First few weeks, same response to humans and objects. 
Indiscriminate attachment 
2–7 months, preference for (familiar) people, no stranger/ separation anxiety. 
Specific attachments 
Stranger and separation anxiety in regard to one particular adult = primary attachment figure (65% were mother). 
Multiple attachments 
Soon after attachment behaviour directed towards more than one adult (secondary attachments). 
Schaffer and Emerson’s research 
Procedure 
Mothers of 60 working-class Glasgow babies reported monthly on separation and stranger anxiety. 
Findings 
Babies’ attachment behaviour progressed as detailed in Schaffer and Emerson’s stage theory. 
Important insights into human behaviour. 
Lorenz’s research Harlow’s research 
Procedure Procedure 
Evaluation 
Research support 
Regolin and Vallortigara observed chicks imprint on moving shapes. 
Generalisability to humans 
Attachment systems in birds are less complex and not two-way. 
Evaluation extra: Applications to human behaviour 
Imprinting explains computer operating system choice (Seebach). 
Generalisability to humans 
Monkeys more similar to humans than birds but human mind and behaviour are more complex. 
Evaluation extra: Ethical issues 
Procedure caused severe long­term distress to participants, may not be outweighed by theoretical and practical benefits. 
Evaluation 
Good external validity 
Mothers did the observing so babies 
not stressed by being observed. Counterpoint – mothers might not have accurately noted behaviour. 
Poor evidence for the asocial stage 
Babies have poor co-ordination, so just may seem asocial. 
Real-world application 
No harm in starting at day care during asocial/indiscriminate stages (any skilled adult adequate), but problematic starting day care in specific attachment stage. 
Evaluation extra: Generalisability 
Data gathered only in 1960s working-class Glasgow, e.g. multiple attachment may be different in collectivist cultures (van IJzendoorn). 




 Revision summaries // 99 

Practice questions, answers and feedback 
Question 1 Schaffer identified different stages in the development of attachment. Briefly outline one of these different stages. (2 marks)  
Morticia’s answer There are four different stages in Schaffer’s theory: asocial stage, indiscriminate, discriminate and multiple attachments. In this last stage a baby forms more than one attachment.  Morticia correctly identified three of the four stages (and got one wrong), but she only needed to name one. There is a partial outline here of multiple attachments but only a weak answer. Luke’s is a more focused answer as one stage is identified (as required) and the outline is just about detailed enough for a question of this kind. Vladimir’s answer would not gain any credit. He gives a vague and muddled answer that describes the process of attachment in general but not specific stages.  
Luke’s answer The first stage is the asocial stage. In this stage a baby doesn’t behave differently towards people and objects and has no attachments.  
Vladimir’s answer One of the stages is when a baby becomes attached. Before that the baby has no especial attachments and after that the baby develops many attachments.  

Question 2 Explain how the behaviour of a child who is classified as insecure–avoidant would be different from a child classified as insecure–resistant. (4 marks)  
Morticia’s answer Insecure–avoidant means a baby avoids its mother on reunion whereas insecure–resistant means the baby resists at reunion. Another difference is in terms of stranger anxiety. Insecure–avoidant babies show little stranger anxiety whereas insecure–resistant babies show a lot.  Morticia has clearly met the ‘distinguish’ requirement of the question and made two relevant contrasting points, so top-class answer. The first part of Luke’s answer is inaccurate. The second sentence is correct but there is no distinction made with resistant children so the answer offers nothing of value. All the detail in Vladimir’s answer is correct; however, his expression  
Luke’s answer Stranger anxiety is low in both types of attachment and the same is true for separation anxiety. Avoidant children don’t seek proximity but they do explore freely.  
Vladimir’s answer Insecure–avoidant babies explore freely but don’t seek proximity.  
They show little separation or stranger anxiety. Insecure–resistant babies resist  is poor. The reader is rather left to make the distinction between  
comfort on reunion and can get very distressed.  the two types themselves rather than being directed by Vladimir (Morticia’s answer is much better in this respect). Therefore this constitutes a partial answer.  

Question 3 Edgar is an only child. He is one year old. His mother has to work away from home most of the time so he is cared for by his father. Explain the relationship Edgar is likely to have with his father. Refer to psychological evidence in your answer. (4 marks)  
Morticia’s answer Since he is cared for by his father most of the time then he might be securely attached to his father, though he might not be because research has shown that what matters is the quality of the relationship. So even though he isn’t with his mother a lot of the time he still might be more closely attached to her. He would still be attached to his father but not as closely.  In Morticia’s answer the reference to secure attachment is relevant as is the evaluative comment regarding quality. There is very little evidence though so the answer is not really addressing the question. Luke’s answer is too generic and anecdotal (and there is also no application to Edgar). The brief reference to ‘a study’ at the end of the answer needs additional detail to be regarded as a contribution. Vladimir makes reference to evidence here as well as a clear  
Luke’s answer The role of the father can be for fun and play. Or children are sometimes most closely attached to their father, more than their mother. There is nothing that says close attachments have to be to mothers. There was a study where some children were more attached to their father than their mothers.  
Vladimir’s answer The study by Schaffer and Emerson found that children were  
occasionally more closely attached to their fathers than their mothers. This means that  link to Edgar in the context of this. The analytical comment at  
Edgar might be more closely attached to his father especially as he spends more time with  the end is also relevant. The application and/or use of evidence  
him. Though Schaffer and Emerson didn’t find that amount of time was important.  needs a little bit more development.  

Question 4 Briefly evaluate Bowlby’s theory of maternal deprivation. (3 marks)  
Morticia’s answer Bowlby claimed there was a critical period in development, around the age of 2. If attachments don’t form at that time it is unlikely they will develop at all. The importance of attachments is that they influence relationships later in life because they are a template from the internal working model.  Unfortunately Morticia appears to have misinterpreted the question and focused on Bowlby’s monotropic theory of attachment instead. There is some marginal relevance in what is written. This reinforces the fact that questions should always be read carefully. Luke has focused on one limitation only but there is nothing in the question to suggest this is not a legitimate approach. This is a reasonably, well-elaborated point. Vladimir takes a different approach and provides three separate  
Luke’s answer One limitation of this theory is that Bowlby may have confused deprivation and privation. Another psychologist called Rutter pointed this out – the difference is that privation would refer to a child never having formed an attachment. This might be much more serious than separations and maybe some of Bowlby’s 44 thieves experienced privation. So it is all muddled.  
Vladimir’s answer There are some problems with the evidence. For example, in  
Bowlby’s 44 thieves it could be that there were other extraneous variables, such as a  evaluative points. The emphasis on evaluating the ‘evidence’ rather  
poor physical environment, that caused the later problems. Other research has shown  than the theory detracts from the overall value of the answer. Not  
that children can recover from such experiences. Another issue is that animal studies  as good an answer as Luke’s.  
were used to support this and they can’t be generalised to humans.  

On this spread we look at some typical student answers to questions. The comments provided indicate what is good and bad in each answer. Learning how to produce effective question answers is a SKILL. Read pages 213 223 for guidance. 
Question 5 Discuss animal studies of attachment, including research by Lorenz and Harlow. (12 marks AS, 16 marks AL) 
Luke’s answer Animal studies of attachment are useful because you can’t do the same kinds of things practically or ethically with humans, so they give support to theories like Bowlby’s theory. In this essay I am going to describe and evaluate Lorenz’s research on imprinting and Harlow’s research on contact  Luke’s essay is an AS response whereas Vladimir’s is an A level response.  
comfort. Both were important in the development of Bowlby’s theory. Before Bowlby’s theory there was  
also learning theory and this research was important in showing that learning theory was wrong.  Apart from a hint of an evaluative point at the  
Lorenz did research with geese and goslings. He had a group of goose eggs and when one lot hatched the first thing they saw was Lorenz. They followed him around. To test this Lorenz put a whole lot of young geese together, some of them had imprinted on their real mother. As expected the ones that  beginning, there is not really anything of value in Luke’s first paragraph. Many students waste important time with introductory paragraphs.  
imprinted on Lorenz followed him instead of their real mother. Bowlby based his idea of attachment on imprinting and said that babies become attached like geese imprint – because it makes them more likely to survive as they stick close to an adult and are less likely to be eaten.  The second paragraph is better, though elements of the Lorenz description are poorly expressed. There is effective use of evidence at  
Harlow’s study was with baby monkeys. He had observed that baby monkeys often survived better in  the end of the study though.  
cages without their mother if you gave them a soft cloth to cuddle. He set up an experiment to test this where there were two wire mothers. One of the mothers was just wire-covered whereas the other was covered in cloth. The monkeys were kept all the time in a cage just with these two wire mothers. The monkeys spent their time with the cloth-covered mother not the other one which shows that contact  There is more relevant detail of Harlow’s research in the next section followed by another hint of analysis at the end.  
comfort is important in attachment.  There is an evaluative comment in the final  
The big issue with these studies is how much they do tell us about human attachment. In the case of  paragraph too but this should be developed  
geese they are quite different from humans because the attachment system is much more advanced.  much more. In summary, an overly descriptive  
Research with monkeys is better because they are mammals too.   essay that includes too little analysis.  
(323 words)  
Vladimir’s answer  The two most important studies are by Lorenz and Harlow. Lorenz studied  This is an excellent essay that is extremely  
imprinting in geese. He did this by taking the eggs from a goose and putting some of them in an  well written and clear throughout. The studies  
incubator so when they hatched the first thing they saw was Lorenz. The other eggs hatched with their  at the beginning of the answer are concisely  
mother. The goslings with Lorenz continued to follow him around.  presented but contain all the relevant details.  
Lorenz also investigated the relationship between imprinting and mate preferences. He observed that a peacock tried to mate with a tortoise because it had been raised in a reptile house.  Perhaps Vladimir could have used the evidence in the first paragraphs a little more effectively by adding an implication/conclusion at the end  
Harlow did an experiment with monkeys kept in a cage with two wire mothers. In one condition the feeding bottle was on a wire mother with no covering. In another condition the bottle was on the other  of each paragraph – a bit of analysis. However, this is a minor point.  
wire mother, which was covered in cloth. The monkeys always preferred the mother covered in cloth,  
which shows that feeding is not important in attachment.  
The research by both Lorenz and Harlow has been very valuable for understanding attachment and how  In the 4th paragraph there is effective use  
early attachment affects later behaviour. There is support for imprinting from Regolin and Vallortigara  of supporting evidence for both Lorenz and  
who observed that chicks imprint on shapes and follow them when they moved. Later research on  Harlow.  
attachment supports Harlow’s findings about difficulties later in life.  
There is the important issue of ethics. In both these studies the animal’s subsequent development was affected by the research. For example the monkeys remained quite disturbed because they were raised  As this is a ‘studies’ rather than a ‘theories’  
in isolation. But it is a question of costs and benefits because, on the other hand, this research has been  essay, discussion of ethical issues is perfectly  
valuable not only in developing theories but also in the way children are treated. It has helped social  appropriate (ethical issues can’t change a  
workers understand the risk factors in child abuse.  theory) and the explanation of the costs and  
benefits in such research is particularly well  
A major issue is how much these studies can be used in theories of human behaviour. In the case  considered.  
of geese there is much that is different. The mammalian attachment system is quite different from  
imprinting so it is a mistake to base the idea of attachment on the behaviour of birds. There is a  
stronger argument for generalising from monkeys to humans, as they are genetically very similar to us  
but nevertheless differ in important ways. For example, they do not have such prolonged childhoods  The rest of the answer is also impressive and  
and may not develop permanent relationships. Their behaviour is less guided by thinking than in the  develops the theme of generalisation (or the  
case of humans, which means that their behaviour would be more determined by experiences than their  lack thereof) from animal studies to human  
capacity to think about how to conduct a relationship.    behaviour very well. 
(411 words)  

 Practice questions, answers and feedback // 101 

Multiple-choice questions 
Caregiver–infant interactions The role of the father Explanations of attachment: Learning theory 
1. Which of the following best describes reciprocity? 
(a) 
A walk. 

(b) 
A chat. 

(c) 
A dance. 

(d) 
A fight. 


2. During interaction, the mother’s and baby’s signals are often seen to: 
(a) 
Synchronise. 

(b) 
Differentiate. 

(c) 
Slow down. 

(d) 
Stay the same. 


3. Which of the following are associated with good quality caregiver–infant attachment? 
(a) 
Low levels of caregiver skill in responding to signals. 

(b) 
High levels of stress in caregiver(s). 

(c) 
Low levels of interactional synchrony. 

(d) 
High levels of interactional synchrony. 


4. Which of these is a strength of research into early interaction? 
(a) 
It is a socially sensitive topic. 

(b) 
It is easy to interpret babies’ behaviour. 

(c) 
Controlled observations capture fine detail. 

(d) 
Observations tell us the functions of behaviour. 




Schaffer’s stages of attachment 
1. In which of these stages does a child first display social behaviour towards all adults? 
(a) 
The asocial stage. 

(b) 
The indiscriminate attachment stage. 

(c) 
The specific attachment stage. 

(d) 
The multiple attachment stage. 


2. At what age do children usually start to form a specific attachment? (a) 2 months. (b) 7 months. (c) 11 months. (d) 18 months. 
3. In the 1964 study which of the following best describes the participants? 
(a) 
60 girls aged 18 months from Glasgow. 

(b) 
60 middle-class children and fathers from Edinburgh. 

(c) 
30 working-class boys and their families from Glasgow. 

(d) 
60 working-class children and their families from Glasgow. 


4. Schaffer and Emerson assessed what in the babies? 
(a) 
Stranger anxiety. 

(b) 
Separation anxiety. 

(c) 
Separation and stranger anxiety. 

(d) 
Zombie-related anxiety. 



1. According to Schaffer and Emerson, what percentage of babies attach to their father before anyone else? (a) 0% (b) 3% (c) 27% (d) 50% 
2. Which of the following statements best describes the importance of attachment to the father? 
(a) 
Not important at all. 

(b) 
The most important attachment. 

(c) 
More important than attachment to the mother. 

(d) 
Less important than attachment to the mother. 


3. Which of the following activities is more common in fathers than mothers? 
(a) 
Smiling. 

(b) 
Holding. 

(c) 
Imitating. 

(d) 
Playing. 


4. Which of these is a strength of research into the role of the father? 
(a) 
It has real-world applications. 

(b) 
It has good external reliability. 

(c) 
It is subject to bias. 

(d) 
It is socially sensitive. 



Animal studies of attachment 
1. The term that describes how early contact influences mate preference: 
(a) 
Imprinting. 

(b) 
Contact comfort. 

(c) 
Deprivation. 

(d) 
Sexual imprinting. 


2. Which of these behaviours describes Harlow’s monkeys that were maternally deprived? 
(a) 
Aggressive. 

(b) 
Sociable. 

(c) 
Socially skilled. 

(d) 
Good parents. 


3. In which condition were Harlow’s monkeys most damaged by early experience? 
(a) 
Biological mother from birth. 

(b) 
Wire mother with milk bottle. 

(c) 
Wire mother covered in cloth. 

(d) 
Biological mother from two months. 


4. Which of the following statements is true of Lorenz’s research? 
(a) 
A control group was hatched with a mother goose. 

(b) 
The experimental group was hatched with a mother goose. 

(c) 
Both groups of young geese preferred the mother goose to Lorenz. 

(d) 
Both groups of young geese preferred Lorenz to the mother goose. 


1. According to classical conditioning, which of the following best describes the attachment figure: 
(a) 
An unconditioned stimulus. 

(b) 
An unconditioned response. 

(c) 
A conditioned stimulus. 

(d) 
All the above. 


2. A parent learning to comfort a crying baby in order to stop it crying is an example of: 
(a) 
Negative reinforcement. 

(b) 
Positive reinforcement. 

(c) 
Punishment. 

(d) 
A primary drive. 


3. In learning theory, which of the following is the focus of a primary drive? 
(a) 
Food. 

(b) 
Love. 

(c) 
Comfort. 

(d) 
Aggression. 


4. Which of the following is true of learning theory explanations of attachment? 

(a) 
They make use of classical conditioning only. 

(b) 
There is counter-evidence from human studies. 

(c) 
Attachment is seen as a primary drive. 


(d) 
They focus on the role of interactional synchrony. 



Explanations of attachment: Bowlby’s theory 
1. Which of the following statements is true of monotropy? 
(a) 
One attachment is seen as different and more important than others. 

(b) 
Children can only attach to one person. 

(c) 
Children must have one caregiver only. 

(d) 
The primary attachment figure must be the biological mother. 


2. Which of the following is probably not a social releaser? 
(a) 
Smiling. 

(b) 
Cooing. 

(c) 
Gripping. 

(d) 
Projectile vomiting. 



3. Internal working models have an influence on which of the following? 
(a) 
Romantic relationships. 

(b) 
Relationships with children. 

(c) 
Relationships with friends. 

(d) 
All of these. 


4. According to Bowlby, the critical period in humans may extend to: 
(a) 
One month. 

(b) 
Twelve months. 

(c) 
Two years. 

(d) 
Sixteen years. 


 Multiple-choice questions // 103 
’ ’ ’ 






Chapter 4 Approaches in Psychology 
If you were a painter … how would you describe this picture? What features or aspects would be of most interest to you? 
If you were a geographer … how would you describe this picture? If you were a historian … how would you describe this picture? If you were a mathematician … how would you describe this picture? If you were a bee … how would you describe this picture? 
You are a psychologist ... How would you describe this picture? 
Just as this picture could be described in different ways by different people (or insects!), so different psychologists approach the study of human beings in different ways. 
In this chapter, we explore some of the key approaches in psychology and their suggestions as to how we should best investigate and understand human behaviour and experience. 
First, however, we chart the origins of psychology, from its early beginnings, through to the present day. 

Contents 
Origins of Psychology 106 
Learning approaches: The behaviourist approach 108 Social learning theory 110 
The cognitive approach 112 The biological approach 114 Biopsychology: 
The nervous system and the endocrine system 116 Neurons and synaptic transmission 118 
A level only: The psychodynamic approach 120 Humanistic psychology 122 Comparision of approaches 
124 

Practical corner 
126 

Revision summaries 
128 

Practice questions, answers and feedback 
130 

Multiple-choice questions 
132 
Chapter 4 Contents // 105 
Origins of Psychology 
The specification says… 
Origins of Psychology: Wundt, introspection and 
the emergence of Psychology as a science. 

The idea of psychology as a distinct branch of study is generally dated at around 1880 when the frst experimental lab was established. 
That said, the philosophical roots of psychology stretch back much earlier than this. On this spread, we shall describe the work of the frst ever experimental psychologist, as well as chart the emergence of psychology as a scientifc discipline. 
Key terms 

Introspection˜The frst systematic experimental attempt to study the mind by breaking up conscious awareness into basic structures of thoughts, images and sensations. 
Psychology˜The scientifc study of the mind, behaviour and experience. 
Science˜A means of acquiring knowledge through systematic and objective investigation. The aim is to discover general laws. 
1900s 
1950s 
Sigmund Freud 
1913 Carl Rogers and emphasises the 
Abraham Maslow 
influence of the develop the humanistic 

17th century – 
writes Psychology 
unconscious mind approach, the so­

19th century 
as the Behaviourist 
on behaviour (the 
called ‘third force’ in views it and, laterPsychology is a psychodynamic psychology, rejecting 

with B.F. Skinner,
branch of the 
approach). He also 
the behaviourist and 
1879 
establishes the broader discipline 
develops his person-
the psychodynamic 

behaviourist 
of philosophy. If Wilhelm Wundt centred therapy, view that human

approach. The 
psychology has a opens the first psychoanalysis, and behaviour is psychodynamic definition during experimental shows that physical determined by outside and behaviourist this time it is as psychology lab problems can be factors. Humanistic approaches experimental in Germany, explained in terms psychologists dominatephilosophy. and psychology of conflicts within emphasise the psychology for the 
emerges as a the mind. 
importance of self-first half of the distinct discipline determination and free 20th century. 
in its own right. 



Learning approaches: The behaviourist approach 
The specification says… 
Learning approaches: i) The behaviourist approach, including classical conditioning and Pavlov’s research, operant conditioning, types of reinforcement and Skinner’s research. 

The behaviourist approach emerged at the beginning of the 20th century and became the dominant approach in psychology for half of that century. 
It is also credited as being the driving force in the development of psychology as a scientifc discipline. 
Key terms 

Behaviourist (behavioural) approach˜A way of explaining behaviour in terms of what is observable and in terms of learning. 
Classical conditioning˜Learning by association. Occurs when two stimuli are repeatedly paired together – an unconditioned (unlearned) stimulus (UCS) and a new ‘neutral’ stimulus (NS). The neutral stimulus eventually produces the same response that was frst produced by the unconditioned (unlearned) stimulus alone. 
Operant conditioning˜A form of learning in which behaviour is shaped and maintained by its consequences. Possible consequences of behaviour include reinforcement (positive or negative) and punishment. 
Reinforcement˜A consequence of behaviour that increases the likelihood of that behaviour being repeated. Can be positive or negative. 
1 Before conditioning 


response food salivation 
unconditioned unconditioned stimulus response 
2 During conditioning 


response bell food salivation 
Study tip 


response bell no salivation 
neutral no conditioned stimulus response 
3 After conditioning 

response bell salivation 
conditioned conditioned stimulus response 
Often, students have di.culty explaining the distinction between negative reinforcement and punishment. Remember that negative reinforcement increases the likelihood of a behaviour being repeated (because it avoids an unpleasant consequence). In contrast, punishment decreases the likelihood of a behaviour being repeated (because of its unpleasant consequence). 
108 //  Chapter 4 Approaches in Psychology 

Evaluation 
Well-controlled research 
One strength of the behaviourist approach is that it is based on well-controlled research. 
Behaviourists focused on the measurement of observable 
behaviour within highly controlled lab settings. By breaking down 
behaviour into basic stimulus–response units, all other possible 
extraneous variables were removed, allowing cause-and-eff ect 
relationships to be established. For instance, Skinner was able to 
clearly demonstrate how reinforcement infl uenced an animal’s 
behaviour. 
This suggests that behaviourist experiments have scientifi c credibility. 
Counterpoint However, the problem with this is that 
behaviourists may have oversimplifi ed the learning process. By 
reducing behaviour to such simple components, behaviourists 
may have ignored an important infl uence on learning – that 
of human thought. Other approaches, such as social learning 
theory (next spread) and the cognitive approach (page 112) have 
drawn attention to the mental processes involved in learning. 
This suggests that learning is more complex than observable 
behaviour alone, and that private mental processes are also 
essential. 
Real-world application 
Another strength of the behaviourist approach is that the principles of conditioning have been applied to real-world behaviours and problems. 
For example, operant conditioning is the basis of token economy systems that have been used successfully in institutions, such as prisons and psychiatric wards. These work by rewarding appropriate behaviour with tokens that can be exchanged for privileges. For an example of how classical conditioning has been applied to the treatment of phobias, see page 148. 
This increases the value of the behaviourist approach because it has widespread application. 
Environmental determinism 
One limitation of the behaviourist approach is that it sees all behaviour as conditioned by past conditioning experiences. 
Skinner suggested that everything we do is the sum total of our reinforcement history. When something happens we may think ‘I made the decision to do that’ but, according to Skinner, our past conditioning history determined the outcome. This ignores any possible infl uence that free will may have on behaviour (Skinner himself said that free will is an illusion). 
This is an extreme position and ignores the infl uence of conscious decision-making processes on behaviour (as suggested by the cognitive approach). 
Evaluation eXtra 
Ethical issues 
Although procedures such as the Skinner box allowed behaviourists to maintain a high degree of control over their experimental ‘subjects’, many have questioned the ethics of conducting such investigations. Animals were housed in harsh, cramped conditions and deliberately kept below their natural weight so they were always hungry. 
Consider: Does what we learn from studies such as the Skinner box justify the way the animals were treated? 
Behaviourism and gambling 
Skinner discovered that if an animal was rewarded every time it activated the lever or pecked the disc, the conditioned behaviour would quickly die out (become extinct) as the animal was satiated (full of food pellets!). 
It was revealed that a variable ratio schedule would prolong the behaviour and was most resistant to extinction. Here, reinforcement is given after an unpredictable (variable) number of responses are produced, for example, every 10, 15, 12, etc., times the lever is pressed. 
This has been applied to a number of forms of human behaviour, including gambling addiction. 
Question 
Explain how addiction to gambling could be explained by the principles above. 
How could the urge to shoot zombies in a video 
game be explained by operant conditioning? 
Behaviourism and gaming 
David Wong (2008) has used Skinnerian principles to explain addiction to video games in his article 5 creepy ways video games are trying to get you addicted. His argument is that the video game environment is a form of Skinner box providing reinforcement that is dependent on certain behaviours. For instance, shooting zombies in the example above leads to successful completion of a level, a high score, etc. 
The use of the lever or joystick in many video games, it is argued, is analogous to the behaviour exhibited by the rat in the Skinner box, and the success and addictive nature of many early video games, such as Pac-Man, is explained by the fact that the central character navigates its way around the screen literally munching on food pellets!  
Question 
How could video game addiction be explained using behaviourist principles? 
Check it 
1. 
Brie˜ y outline what the behaviourist approach means by ‘classical conditioning’. [2 marks] 

2. 
Outline two types of reinforcement as suggested by the behaviourist approach. [4 marks] 

3. 
Outline and evaluate the behaviourist approach in psychology. 


[12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 
 Learning approaches: The behaviourist approach // 109 
Learning approaches: Social learning theory 



these studies support (or contradict) key SLT concepts. 
2. 
Explain one strength of social learning theory. [3 marks] 

3. 
Outline and evaluate social learning theory. 



[12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 
 Learning approaches: Social learning theory // 111 
The cognitive approach 
The specification says… 
The cognitive approach: the study of internal mental processes, the role of schema, the use of theoretical and computer models to explain and make inferences about mental processes. The emergence of cognitive neuroscience. 

The cognitive approach developed in the 1950s as a response to the behaviourists’ failure to acknowledge mental processes. The development of the frst computers gave cognitive psychologists a metaphor for describing mental processes. 
Key terms 

Cognitive approach˜The term ‘cognitive’ has come to mean ‘mental processes’, so this approach is focused on how our mental processes (e.g. thoughts, perceptions, attention) a.ect behaviour. 
Internal mental processes˜‘Private’ operations of the mind such as perception and attention that mediate between stimulus and response. 
Schema˜A mental framework of beliefs and expectations that infuence cognitive processing. They are developed from experience. 
Inference˜The process whereby cognitive psychologists draw conclusions about the way mental processes operate on the basis of observed behaviour. 
Cognitive neuroscience˜The scientifc study of those biological structures that underpin cognitive processes. 

Problem-solving 


Evaluation 
Scientif c methods 
One strength of the cognitive approach is that it uses objective, scientifi c methods. 
Cognitive psychologists employ highly controlled and rigorous methods of study so researchers are able to infer cognitive processes at work. This has involved the use of lab studies to produce reliable, objective data. In addition, the emergence of cognitive neuroscience has enabled the two fi elds of biology and cognitive psychology to come together to enhance the scientifi c basis of study. 
This means that the study of the mind has a credible scientifi c basis. 
Counterpoint As cognitive psychology relies on the 
inference of mental processes, rather than direct observation 
of behaviour, it can occasionally suff er from being too abstract 
and theoretical in nature. Similarly, research studies of mental 
processes are oft en carried out using artifi cial stimuli (such as 
tests of memory involving word lists) that may not represent 
everyday experience. 
Therefore, research on cognitive processes may lack external 


validity. 
Real-world application 
Another strength of the cognitive approach is that it has practical application. 
The cognitive approach is probably the dominant approach in psychology today and has been applied to a wide range of practical and theoretical contexts. For example, cognitive psychology has made an important contribution in the fi eld of artifi cial intelligence (AI) and the development of ‘thinking machines’ (robots). These are exciting advances that may revolutionise how we live in the future. Cognitive principles have also been applied to the treatment of depression (see pages 152–153) and improved the reliability of eyewitness testimony (pages 58–63). 
This supports the value of the cognitive approach. 
Machine reductionism 
One limitation of the cognitive approach is that it is based on machine reductionism. 
There are similarities between the human mind and the 
operations of a ‘thinking machine’ such as a computer (inputs 
and outputs, storage systems, the use of a central processor). 
However, the computer analogy has been criticised. Such machine 
reductionism ignores the infl uence of human emotion and 
motivation on the cognitive system, and how this may aff ect our 
ability to process information. For instance, research has found that 
human memory may be aff ected by emotional factors, such as the 
infl uence of anxiety on eyewitnesses (see pages 60–61). 
This suggests that machine reductionism may weaken the validity of the cognitive approach. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Soft determinism 
The cognitive approach is founded on soft  determinism, i.e. the view that human behaviour may be determined by internal and external factors but we also can exert our free will at times. The hard determinism view says all our behaviour is determined by factors other than our will, such as conditioning and genes. 
Consider: Why is the cognitive approach a more ° exible position than the behaviourist approach? 
Misperceived song lyrics 
Did Celine Dion really sing ‘The 
hot dogs go on’ on the 1997 
Titanic movie soundtrack? A 
case of schema distorting our 
interpretations of sensory 
information, leading to 
perceptual errors. 
The inf uence of schema on perception 
1. Read the following paragraph: The Pschyology of Zombeis 
Evrey gnereation gtes the mosnter it deserevs as the reprsenetaiton of its depeest faers. Tdoay’s zombeis, who are usulaly infetced in thier thuosands, repersent our modren faer of contaiguos disesaes, uncnotrolled medcial techonolgoy and socail colalpse. Zombeis are lniked, in our cutlure, with daeth and we probalby evovled to aviod daed and disesaed bodeis to aviod infcetoin’, accrodnig to Lynn Alden, a profsesor of pschyology at the Univesrity of Britsih Colmobia. ‘But its one thnig to aviod a corspe that ins’t movnig and qiute anotehr wehn tehy strat chasnig you!’ 
Question 
Explain the role of schema in helping you make sense of the information above. 
2. Many people misread the following sentences. 
Question 
Explain the role of schema in the misperception of the sentences above. 
3. Bugelski and Alampay (1962) The rat-man 
Two groups of participants were shown a sequence of pictures, either a number of different faces or a number of different animals. They were then shown the ambiguous ÿ gure of the ‘rat-man’ (below). 
Participants who saw a sequence of faces were more likely to perceive the ÿ gure as a man, whereas participants who saw a sequence of animals were more likely to perceive the ÿ gure as a rat. 
Question 
Explain how the in° uence of schema may account for this. 
Check it 
1. 
Outline the emergence of cognitive neuroscience. [4 marks] 

2. 
Brie˜ y explain how theoretical and computer models are used in cognitive psychology to make inferences about mental processes. [4 marks] 

3. 
Outline and evaluate the cognitive approach. 


[12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 
 The cognitive approach // 113 
The biological approach 

Evaluation 
Real-world application 
One strength of the biological approach is that it has real-world application. 
Increased understanding of neurochemical processes in the brain is associated with the use of psychoactive drugs to treat serious mental disorders. For example, the biological approach has promoted the treatment of clinical depression using antidepressant drugs that increase levels of the neurotransmitter serotonin at synapses in the brain. Such drugs have been associated with the reduction of depressive symptoms. 
This means that people with depression may be better able to manage their condition and live their lives in the community, rather than remain in hospital. 
Counterpoint Although antidepressant drugs are successful for many 
patients, they do not work for everyone. For instance, a recent study by 
Andrea Cipriani et al. (2018) compared 21 antidepressant drugs and found 
wide variations in their eff ectiveness. Although most of the drugs were more 
eff ective than placebos in comparative trials, the researchers concluded that 
the eff ects of antidepressants, in general, were ‘mainly modest’. 
This challenges the value of the biological approach because it suggests 
that brain chemistry alone may not account for all cases of, for example, 
depression. 
Scientif c methods 
Another strength of the approach is that it uses scientifi c methods of investigation. 
In order to investigate the genetic and biological basis of behaviour, the biological approach makes use of a range of precise and highly objective methods. These include scanning techniques, such as fMRIs and EEGs. With advances in technology, it is possible to accurately measure physiological and neural processes in ways that are not open to bias. 
This means that much of the biological approach is based on objective and reliable data. 
Biological determinism 
One limitation of the biological approach is that it is determinist. 
The biological approach is determinist in that it sees human behaviour as governed by internal, genetic causes over which we have no control. However, we have already seen that the way in which an individual’s genotype is expressed (phenotype – see facing page) is heavily infl uenced by the environment. Not even identical twins who share the same genes look the same and think the same. Also, a purely genetic argument becomes problematic when we consider things such as crime. Could a violent criminal, for instance, really excuse their actions by claiming their behaviour was controlled by a ‘crime gene’? 
This suggests that the biological view is oft en too simplistic and ignores the mediating eff ects of the environment. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Natural selection 
Twin study 
In a study of depression, a researcher investigated the genetic basis of the disorder. One way to do this is to compare concordance rates for identical twins (monozygotic) who have exactly the same genes with non-identical (dizygotic) twins who share about 50% of the same genes. Both kinds of twins grow up in similar environments. Concordance rates express the likelihood that a trait present in one twin is also found in the other twin. 
The following mean concordance rates found by the researcher were: Monozygotic (MZ) twins – 49% Dizygotic (DZ) twins – 17% Ordinary siblings – 9% 
Questions 
1. 
Is this a lab, ÿ eld, natural or quasi-experiment? Explain your choice. (2.marks) 

2. 
What type of experimental design has been used? Explain your answer. (2 marks) 

3. 
Identify the independent and dependent variables within this experiment. (2 marks) 

4. 
Explain what the ÿ ndings above tell us about the genetic basis of depression. Refer to all three ÿ ndings in your answer. (3 marks) 


PKU 
Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a rare genetic disorder that can be detected in babies using a heel prick test. If left unchecked, PKU causes severe learning difÿ culties in those who carry the genotype. If detected early enough, however, the child can be placed on a restricted diet and will not go on to develop learning difÿ culties. 
Questions 
1. 
Explain how PKU illustrates the relationship between genotype and phenotype. 

2. 
Do some further research yourself and identify another genetic condition that illustrates the relationship between genotype and phenotype. 


Critics of Darwin’s work, such as Karl Popper, claim that it is not possible My genes made me do it. to falsify the theory of natural selection (a key criterion of science) as we cannot show evolution happening, we can only deduce it has taken Check it place. However, others claim that the basic principles are supported by 
1. Explain what is meant by ‘evolution’ in 
fossil records (e.g. showing dinosaurs changing into birds). 
psychology. [3 marks] Consider: To what extent is natural selection a substantiated 2. Using an example, explain the difference theory? between ‘genotype’ and ‘phenotype’. [4 marks] 
3. Outline two features of the biological 
approach. Explain two limitations of the Study tip biological approach. [8 marks] 
If you are writing an essay on the biological approach, make sure 
4. Discuss the contribution of the biological 
you do not include too much description of biological structures 
approach to our understanding of human 
and processes. An essay should be a concise overview of the 
behaviour. [12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 
approach itself. 
 The biological approach // 115 
Biopsychology: The nervous system and 
the endocrine system 

The specification says… 
Humans, like all animals, have two major physiological systems that regulate behaviour in response to the environment. These are the nervous system and the endocrine system. 
Key terms 

Nervous system˜Consists of the central nervous system and the peripheral nervous system. Communicates using electrical signals. 
Central nervous system (CNS) Consists of the brain and the spinal cord and is the origin of all complex commands and decisions. 
Peripheral nervous system (PNS) Sends information to the CNS from the outside world, and transmits messages from the CNS to muscles and glands in the body. 
Somatic nervous system (SNS) Transmits information from receptor cells in the sense organs to the CNS. It also receives information from the CNS that directs muscles to act. 
Autonomic nervous system (ANS) Transmits information to and from internal bodily organs. It is ‘autonomic’ as the system operates involuntarily 
(i.e. automatic). It has two main divisions: the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems. 
The nervous system acts more rapidly than the endocrine system but they are both very fast. The nervous system’s 
average response time is 0.25 seconds but may be as quick as 100 milliseconds. The endocrine responses are slower because hormones have to travel through the bloodstream (about 2 or 3 seconds) but last longer. 


The major subdivisions of the human nervous system. 
The divisions of the nervous system: central and peripheral (somatic and autonomic). 
The function of the endocrine system: glands and hormones. 
The fight or flight response including the role of adrenaline. 




A frightening 
experience 
Jim Bob was telling his friend Sue Ellen about his recent frightening experience. 
‘I was walking home by myself in the dark. Suddenly, I heard a shuf°ing noise behind me and the faint smell of rotting °esh. I realised it was coming closer. I saw a bus at the bus stop and decided to run. I could hear the footsteps getting closer. I don’t think I’ve ever moved so quickly. I leapt on the bus – shaking, sweating and my heart was beating fast. I turned to see an empty street as the bus pulled away from the stop. Had I imagined it?’ 
Question 
Outline the role of the central nervous system and autonomic nervous system in behaviour. Refer to Jim Bob’s experience in your answer. 




Stress and illness 
Research has shown that people who get ill have often experienced major stressful life events in the previous few months and years, such as getting married, divorce, death of a loved one, etc. A researcher investigated this relationship between illness and life events. She gave 150 participants a questionnaire in which they had to indicate the number of major life events (from a list of 20) they had experienced over the past three years. This was compared with the number of days off work through illness the participants had had over the same period. 
The researcher found a positive correlation between the two co-variables. 

Hypothalamus 
Pituitary 
Thyroid Parathyroid 
The main endocrine glands in the human body. 
Adrenals Pancreas 
Ovaries (female) 
Testes (male) 

Key terms 

Endocrine system˜One of the body’s major information systems that instructs glands to release hormones directly into the bloodstream. These hormones are carried towards target organs in the body. Communicates via chemicals. 
Gland˜An organ in the body that synthesises substances such as hormones. 
Hormones˜Chemical substances that circulate in the bloodstream and only a.ect target organs. They are produced in large quantities but disappear quickly. Their e.ects are very powerful. 
Fight or fight response˜The way an animal responds when stressed. The body becomes physiologically aroused in readiness to fght an aggressor or, in some 
. fee ,cases 
Adrenaline˜A hormone produced by the adrenal glands which is part of the human body’s immediate stress response system. Adrenaline has a strong e.ect on the cells of the cardiovascular system – stimulating heart rate, contracting blood vessels and dilating air passages. 
Biological changes associated with the sympathetic and parasympathetic response. 
Sympathetic state  Parasympathetic state  
Increases heart rate  Decreases heart rate  
Increases breathing rate  Decreases breathing rate  
Dilates pupils  Constricts pupils  
Inhibits digestion  Stimulates digestion  
Inhibits saliva production  Stimulates saliva production  
Contracts rectum  Relaxes rectum  

Biopsychology: Neurons and synaptic transmission 
The specification says… 
The structure and function of sensory, relay and motor neurons. 
The process of synaptic transmission including reference to neurotransmitters, excitation and inhibition. 

On the previous spread we considered the major biological structures and systems. Now we will delve a little deeper and, in so doing, get a good deal smaller! We will investigate how the nervous system transmits signals via the billions of nerve cells (neurons) it houses. 
We will also consider how these nerve cells communicate with each other, through electrical and chemical messages, within the body and the brain. 
Key terms 

Neuron˜The basic building blocks of the nervous system, neurons are nerve cells that process and transmit messages through electrical and chemical signals. 
Sensory neurons˜These carry messages from the PNS (peripheral nervous system) to the CNS. They have long dendrites and short axons. 
Relay neurons˜These connect the sensory neurons to the motor or other relay neurons. They have short dendrites and short axons. 
Motor neurons˜These connect the CNS (central nervous system) to e.ectors such as muscles and glands. They have short dendrites and long axons. 


Key terms 
Synaptic transmission 
Chemical transmission  
Neurons communicate with each  
other within groups known as neural  axon  
networks. Each neuron is separated  
from the next by an extremely tiny  
gap called the synapse. Signals within neurons are transmitted electrically. However, signals between neurons  synaptic vesicle neurotransmitter  presynaptic nerve terminal  
are transmitted chemically across the  synapse  
synapse.  
When the electrical impulse reaches  
the end of the neuron (the presynaptic  
terminal) it triggers the release of  
neurotransmitter from tiny sacs called  
synaptic vesicles.  dendrite  postsynaptic receptor sites  
Neurotransmitters  

Neurotransmitters are chemicals that diff use across the synapse to the next neuron in the chain. Once a neurotransmitter crosses the gap, it is taken up by a postsynaptic receptor site on the dendrites of the next neuron (axons take signals to the synapse, dendrites take signals away). Here, the chemical message is converted back into an electrical impulse and the process of transmission begins again in this other neuron. 
It is worth noting that the direction of travel can only be one-way. This is because neurotransmitters are released from the presynaptic neuron terminal and received by the postsynaptic neuron (at the receptor sites). 
Several dozen types of neurotransmitter have been identifi ed in the brain (as well as in the spinal cord and some glands). Each neurotransmitter has its own specifi c molecular structure that fi ts perfectly into a postsynaptic receptor site, similar to a lock and a key. Neurotransmitters also have specialist functions. For instance, acetylcholine (ACh) is found at each point where a motor neuron meets a muscle, and upon its release, it will cause muscles to contract. 
Excitation and inhibition 
Neurotransmitters have either an excitatory or inhibitory eff ect on the neighbouring neuron. For instance, the neurotransmitter serotonin causes inhibition in the receiving neuron, resulting in the neuron becoming more negatively charged and less likely to fi re. In contrast, adrenaline (an element of the stress response which is both a hormone and a neurotransmitter) causes excitation of the postsynaptic neuron by increasing its positive charge and making it more likely to fi re. 
Summation 
Whether a postsynaptic neuron fi res is decided by the process of summation. The excitatory and inhibitory infl uences are summed: if the net eff ect on the postsynaptic neuron is inhibitory then the postsynaptic neuron is less likely to fi re. If the net eff ect is excitatory it is more likely to fi re, i.e. the inside of the postsynaptic neuron momentarily becomes positively charged. Once the electrical impulse is created it travels down the neuron. 
Therefore, the action potential of the postsynaptic neuron is only triggered if the sum of the excitatory and inhibitory signals at any one time reaches the threshold. 
Psychoactive drugs 
Increased understanding of the mode of action of neurotransmitters in the brain has led to the development of psychoactive drugs to treat mental disorders. For instance, depression has been linked to low levels of serotonin, which is thought to play an important role in stabilising mood. 
A category of drugs known as SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) such as Prozac, slow down the reuptake of serotonin after it has crossed the synapse, ensuring it stays active for longer in the synapse. 
Question 
Use your knowledge of synaptic transmission to explain what is happening at the synapse. 
Synaptic transmission˜The process by which neighbouring neurons communicate with each other by sending chemical messages across the gap (the synapse) that separates them. 
Neurotransmitter˜Brain chemicals released from synaptic vesicles that relay signals across the synapse from one neuron to another. Neurotransmitters can be broadly divided into those that perform an excitatory function and those that perform an inhibitory function. 
Excitation˜When a neurotransmitter, such as adrenaline, increases the positive charge of the postsynaptic neuron. This increases the likelihood that the postsynaptic neuron will pass on the electrical impulse. 
Inhibition˜When a neurotransmitter, such as serotonin, increases the negative charge of the postsynaptic neuron. This decreases the likelihood that the postsynaptic neuron will pass on the electrical impulse. 
The ref ex arc 
Fill in the gaps using the terms provided at the 
bottom of the box. 
The knee-jerk re° ex is an example of a re° ex arc: 
A stimulus, such as a hammer, hits the knee. This is 
detected by sense organs in the _________________, 
which convey a message along a _________________. 
The message reaches the _________________, where 
it connects with a _________________. This then 
transfers the message to a _________________. This 
then carries the message to an _________________, 
such as a muscle, which causes the muscle to 
contract and, hence, causes the knee to move or jerk. 
Missing words:  
effector    CNS (central nervous system)  
sensory neuron  PNS (peripheral nervous system)  
motor neuron  relay neuron  

Check it 
1. 
Explain the process of synaptic transmission. [4 marks] 

2. 
With reference to neurotransmitters, explain what is meant by both ‘excitation’ and ‘inhibition’. [4 marks] 

3. 
Explain the difference between a sensory neuron and a relay neuron. [2 marks] 


 Biopsychology: Neurons and synaptic transmission // 119 
The psychodynamic approach 


The specification says… 
The psychodynamic approach: the role 
of the unconscious, the structure of 
personality, that is Id, Ego and Superego, 
defence mechanisms including repression, 
denial and displacement, psychosexual 
stages. 
The psychodynamic approach is most closely associated with the work of Sigmund Freud (though several post Freudians were infuenced by and expanded upon many of Freud’s ideas). 
Key terms 

Psychodynamic approach˜A perspective that describes the di.erent forces (dynamics), most of which are unconscious, that operate on the mind and direct human behaviour and experience. 
The unconscious˜The part of the mind that we are unaware of but which directs much of our behaviour. 
Id˜Entirely unconscious, the Id is made up of selfsh aggressive instincts that demand immediate gratifcation. 
Ego˜The ‘reality check’ that balances the conficting demands of the Id and the Superego. 
Superego˜The moralistic part of our personality which represents the ideal self – how we ought to be. 
Defence mechanisms˜Unconscious strategies that the Ego uses to manage the confict between the Id and the Superego. 
Psychosexual stages˜Five developmental stages that all children pass through. At each stage there is a di.erent confict, the outcome of which determines future development. 
Psychosexual stages 



Question 
Three examples of defence mechanisms in action are given below. Match each example to one defence mechanism listed in the table above. 
A. Continuing to turn up for work even though you have been sacked. 
B. An individual forgetting the trauma of their favourite pet dying. 
C. Slamming the door after a row with your girlfriend/boyfriend. 
There are many aspects of this stage theory that are clearly outdated. 
Evaluation 
Real-world application 
One strength of the psychodynamic approach is that it introduced the idea of psychotherapy (as opposed to physical treatments). 
Freud brought to the world a new form of therapy – psychoanalysis. This was the fi rst attempt to treat mental disorders psychologically rather than physically. The new therapy employed a range of techniques designed to access the unconscious, such as dream analysis. Psychoanalysis claims to help clients by bringing their repressed emotions into their conscious mind so they can be dealt with. Psychoanalysis is the forerunner to many modern-day ‘talking therapies’, such as counselling, that have since been established. 
This shows the value of the psychodynamic approach in creating a new approach to treatment. 
Counterpoint Although Freudian therapists have claimed success for many clients with mild neuroses, psychoanalysis is regarded as inappropriate, even harmful, for people experiencing more serious mental disorders (such as schizophrenia). Many of the symptoms of schizophrenia, such as paranoia and delusional thinking, mean that those with the disorder have lost their grip on reality and cannot articulate their thoughts in the way required by psychoanalysis. 
This suggests that Freudian therapy (and theory) may not apply to all mental disorders. 
Explanatory power 
Another strength of Freud’s theory is its ability to explain human behaviour. Freud’s theory is controversial in many ways, and occasionally bizarre, but it has nevertheless had a huge infl uence on psychology and contemporary 
Freud’s case study of Little Hans and the Oedipus complex 
In the phallic stage, Freud claimed that little boys develop incestuous feelings towards their mother and a murderous hatred for their rival in love – their father (the Oedipus complex). Fearing that their father will castrate them, boys repress their feelings for their mother and identify with their father, taking on his gender role and moral values. 
Freud also suggested that girls of the same age experience penis envy: they desire their father – as the penis is the primary love object – and hate their mother (the Electra complex). Although Freud was less clear on the process in girls, they are thought to give up the desire for their father over time and replace this with a desire for a baby (identifying with their mother in the process). 
Freud supported his concept of the Oedipus complex with his case study of Little Hans. Hans was a ÿ ve-year-old boy who developed a phobia of horses after seeing one collapse in the street. Freud suggested that Hans’s phobia was a form of displacement in which his repressed fear of his father was transferred (displaced) onto horses. Thus, horses were merely a symbolic representation of Hans’s real unconscious fear – the fear of castration experienced during the Oedipus complex. 
Questions 
1. 
Is the Little Hans case study good evidence for the Oedipus con° ict? Explain your answer. 

2. 
Is this a scientiÿ c way of investigating phobias? Explain your answer. 

3. 
How might a behaviourist explain Hans’s phobia of horses? 


thought. Alongside behaviourism, the psychodynamic approach remained a key force in psychology for the fi rst half of the 20th century and has 
been used to explain a wide range of phenomena including personality 
I need to do a bit of planning 
to get it. You can’t 
development, the origins of psychological disorders, moral development and 
gender identity. The approach is also signifi cant in drawing attention to the I want 
have it– 
it now! it’s not right 
connection between experiences in childhood, such as our relationship with our parents, and our later development. 
This suggests that, overall, the psychodynamic approach has had a positive impact on psychology – and also on literature, art and other human endeavours. 
Untestable concepts 
One limitation of the psychodynamic approach is that much of it is untestable. 
The philosopher of science Karl Popper argued that the psychodynamic approach does not meet the scientifi c criterion of falsifi cation. It is not open to empirical testing (and the possibility of being disproved). Many of Freud’s concepts (such as the Id and the Oedipus complex) are said to 
occur at an unconscious level, making them di.  cult, if not impossible, to 
Id, Ego and Superego 
What would the Id, Ego and Superego suggest you do in the following 
situations?
test. Furthermore, his ideas were based on the subjective study of single 
individuals, such as Little Hans, which makes it di.  cult to make universal claims about human behaviour. 
This suggests that Freud’s theory was pseudoscientifi c (not a real science) rather than established fact. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Psychic determinism 
The psychodynamic approach suggests that much of our behaviour is determined by unconscious confl icts rooted in childhood. Freud believed there is no such thing as an ‘accident’. Even something as random as a ‘slip of the tongue’ is driven by unconscious forces and has deep meaning. 
Critics claim this is an extreme view because it dismisses any possible infl uence of free will on behaviour. 
Consider: Do you agree that Freud’s psychic determinism is too extreme? 
1. 
You have missed lunch and are walking past a cake shop. 

2. 
You are just leaving work and your boss asks you to stay an extra hour. 

3. 
You are sitting on a bus and notice someone has left a wallet full of £50 notes. 

4. 
You are driving home and another car pulls out in front of you nearly causing a collision. 


Check it 
1. 
Using an example, explain the ‘role of the unconscious’. [3 marks] 

2. 
Identify one Freudian defence mechanism and explain how it would affect behaviour.  [3 marks] 

3. 
Discuss the psychodynamic approach. Compare the psychodynamic approach with the cognitive approach. 


[16 marks AL] 
 The psychodynamic approach // 121 
more brains than neighbour zombieSelf-esteem 

Humanistic psychology 
The specification says… 














Humanistic psychology: free will, self­actualisation and Maslow’s hierarchy of 





needs, focus on the self, congruence, the 
role of conditions of worth. The influence on 
All the approaches we have considered so far are determinist to some degree in their 
counselling psychology. 
suggestion that behaviour is entirely, or at least partly, shaped by forces over which we have no control. Even the cognitive approach, which claims we are free to choose our own 
Humanistic psychology emerged in the United 
thoughts, would still argue that such choice is constrained by the limits of our cognitive 
States in the 1950s largely as a result of the work 
system. Humanistic psychology is quite different in this respect, claiming that human beings 
of Carl Rogers and Abraham Maslow. It became 
are essentially self-determining and have free will. People are still affected by external and 
known as the ‘third force’ in psychology – alongside 
internal influences, but are also active agents who can determine their own development.
behaviourist and psychodynamic approaches – and 
For this reason, humanistic psychologists such as Rogers and Maslow, reject more scientific 
represented a challenge to both. Rogers felt that 
models that attempt to establish general principles of human behaviour. As active agents we
Freud had dealt with the ‘sick half’ of psychology, 
are all unique, and psychology should concern itself with the study of subjective experience 
so the humanistic approach concerned itself with 
rather than general laws. This is often referred to as a person-centred approach in psychology.
explanations of ‘healthy’ growth in individuals. 

Maslow’s hierarchy of needs











Key terms 

Abraham Maslow was one of the founders of the humanistic movement in psychology. Humanistic psychology˜An approach to One of his main interests was in what motivates people. He described a hierachy of needs understanding behaviour that emphasises the that motivate our behaviour. In order to achieve our primary goal of self-actualisation, a importance of subjective experience and each number of other deficiency needs must first be met. At the bottom (see diagram below left) person’s capacity for self-determination. are physiological needs such as food and water. Imagine you wanted to produce the best 
psychology essay you had ever written, this would be very di.cult if you were hungry or tired.
Free will˜The notion that humans can make choices 
Moving up the hierarchy, the next deficiency need is safety and security followed by love and 
and are not determined by internal biological or 
belongingness and then self-esteem. A person is only able to progress through the hierarchy
external forces. 
once the current need in the sequence has been met. At the top is self-actualisation. 
Self-actualisation˜The desire to grow 
Self-actualisation








psychologically and fulfl one’s full potential – becoming what you are capable of. Most people have an innate desire to achieve their full potential – to become the best they can possibly be. Self-actualisation represents the uppermost level of Maslow’s hierarchy of needs.
Hierarchy of needs˜A fve-levelled hierarchical 
All four lower levels of the hierarchy (‘deficiency needs’) must be met before the individual can 
sequence in which basic physiological needs 
work towards self-actualisation (a ‘growth need’) and fulfil their potential. This applies to early
(such as hunger) must be satisfed before higher 
development when a baby is first focused on physiological needs and applies throughout life.
psychological needs (such as self-esteem and self-
Humanistic psychologists regard personal growth as an essential part of what it is to be
actualisation) can be achieved. 
human. Personal growth is concerned with developing and changing as a person to become Self˜The ideas and values that characterise ‘I’ and fulfilled, satisfied and goal-orientated. Not everyone will manage this, however, and there are ‘me’ and includes perception and valuing of ‘what I important psychological barriers that may prevent a person from reaching their potential. 
am’ and ‘what I can do’. 

The self, congruence and conditions of worth 
















Congruence˜The aim of Rogerian therapy, when the 
Carl Rogers argued that for personal growth to be achieved an individual’s concept of self (the
self-concept and ideal self are seen to broadly accord 
way they see themselves) must be broadly equivalent to, or have congruence with, their ideal
or match. 
self (the person they want to be). If too big a gap exists between the two ‘selves’ the person Conditions of worth˜When a parent places limits will experience a state of incongruence and self-actualisation will not be possible due to the or boundaries on their love of their children. For negative feelings of self-worth that arise from incongruence. instance, a parent saying to a child, ‘I will only love In order to reduce the gap between the self-concept and the ideal self, Rogers developed 
you if…you study medicine’ or ‘if you split up with 
client-centred therapy – also called ‘counselling’ (see facing page) to help people cope with 
that boy’. 
the problems of everyday living. Rogers claimed that many of the issues we experience as adults, such as worthlessness and low self-esteem, have their roots in childhood and can often be explained by a lack of unconditional positive regard (or lack of unconditional love) from 
Maslow’s hierarchy of zombie needs our parents. A parent who sets boundaries or limits on their love for their child (conditions of worth) by claiming ‘I will only love you if…’ is storing up psychological problems for that child in the future. Thus, Rogers saw one of his roles as an effective therapist as being able to provide 
wander 
Growth needs his clients with the unconditional positive regard that they had failed to receive as children. 
aimlessly
Self-actualisation 
consume. 

Self-actualisers
find brains with. Love and belongingness other zombies 
Maslow characterised life as a series of peak experiences – moments of great
avoid fire
Safety and security 

achievement, ecstasy or elation when all deÿciency needs are satisÿed. He also 
need brains 

identiÿed and researched a number of self-actualisers – people who, for whatever
Physiological needs 
reason, were fulÿlled in life and had used their abilities to the fullest. 
Although it might be possible to apply the hierarchy 
of needs to zombies, Maslow argued that the need for  Question  
self-actualisation is uniquely human.  Can you think of any people, in the media or who you know, who could be  
described as self-actualisers? Explain your choices in each case.  
122 // Chapter 4 Approaches in Psychology  

Evaluation 
Not reductionist 
One strength of the humanistic approach is that it rejects attempts to break up behaviour and experience into smaller components (reductionism). 
Behaviourists explain human and animal learning in terms of simple stimulus–response connections. Supporters of the cognitive approach see human beings as little more than information-processing ‘machines’. Biological psychologists reduce behaviour to its basic physiological processes. Freud described the whole of personality as a confl ict between three things: Id, Ego and Superego. In contrast, humanistic psychologists advocate holism, the idea that subjective experience can only be understood by considering the whole person. 
This approach may have more validity than its alternatives by considering meaningful human behaviour within its real-world context. 
Counterpoint Having said that, reductionist approaches 
may be more scientifi c. This is because the ideal of science is the 
experiment, and experiments reduce behaviour to independent 
and dependent variables. One issue with humanistic psychology is 
that, unlike behaviourism, there are relatively few concepts that can 
be broken down to single variables and measured. 
This means that humanistic psychology in general is short on 
empirical evidence to support its claims. 
Positive approach 
Another strength of the humanistic approach is that it is optimistic. 
Humanistic psychologists have been praised for bringing the person back into psychology and promoting a positive image of the human condition. Freud saw human beings as prisoners of their past and claimed all of us existed somewhere between ‘common unhappiness and absolute despair’. In contrast, humanistic psychologists see all people as basically good, free to work towards the achievement of their potential and in control of their lives. 
This suggests that humanistic psychology off ers a refreshing and optimistic alternative to other approaches. 
Cultural bias 
One limitation of the approach is that it may be culturally-biased. 
Many of the ideas that are central to humanistic psychology, such as individual freedom, autonomy and personal growth, would be much more readily associated with countries that have more individualist tendencies (e.g. the US). Countries with collectivist tendencies emphasise more the needs of the group and interdependence. In such countries, the ideals of humanistic psychology may not be as important as in others (e.g. self-actualisation). 
Therefore, it is possible that this approach does not apply universally and is a product of the cultural context within which it was developed. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Limited application 
Critics have argued that humanistic psychology has had relatively little impact in psychology – or little practical application in the real world (in comparison with other approaches, such as behaviourism or the biological approach). The approach has been described, not as a comprehensive theory, but as a loose set of abstract ideas. 
On the other hand, Rogerian therapy revolutionised counselling techniques and Maslow’s hierarchy of needs has been used to explain motivation, particularly in the workplace. 
Consider: Do you agree with the argument that the humanistic approach has had little impact? 
Counselling psychology 
Rogers’ client-centred (or latterly, person-centred) therapy is an important form of modern-day psychotherapy. It led to the general approach of counselling which is applied in many settings today (e.g. Samaritans and other helplines). Rogers referred to those in therapy as ‘clients’ rather than ‘patients’ as he saw the individual as the expert on their own condition. Thus, therapy is not directed by the therapist (non-directive), and the client is just encouraged towards the discovery of their own solutions within a therapeutic atmosphere that is warm, supportive and non-judgemental. 
For Rogers, an eff ective therapist should provide the client with three things: genuineness, empathy and unconditional positive regard. The aim of Rogerian therapy is to increase the person’s feelings of self-worth, reduce the level of incongruence between the self-concept and the ideal self, and help the person become a more fully functioning person. 
Rogers’ work transformed psychotherapy and introduced a variety of counselling techniques. In the UK and the US, similar counselling skills are practised, not only in clinical settings, but throughout education, health, social work and industry. 
Client-centred therapy has been praised as a forward-looking and eff ective approach that focuses on present problems rather than dwelling on the past. However, much like psychoanalysis (see previous spread), it is best applied to the treatment of ‘mild’ psychological conditions, such as anxiety and low self-worth. 
Evaluating counselling 
Question 
Why would counselling be less effective in treating more serious mental disorders such as schizophrenia? 
Joyce: teacher or dancer? 
Joyce is a successful teacher and is well-liked by her colleagues. However, Joyce has always dreamed of becoming a ballroom dancer. She spends much of her free time with her partner practising elaborate lifts, and can often be seen twirling around the classroom during break times. 
Joyce is considering leaving teaching and becoming a professional dancer. Her colleagues have described Joyce’s plans as ‘ridiculous’, and her parents, who are very proud of the fact that their daughter is a teacher, have told Joyce they will not speak to her again if she does. Joyce is beginning to feel sad and miserable. 
Question 
Referring to features of humanistic psychology, explain how Joyce’s situation may affect her personal growth. 
Study tip 
One of the key inf uences on behaviour is culture. Psychologists have tried to categorise the main ways in which cultures inf uence behaviour, such as distinguishing between individualist and collectivist cultures (see left). The UK, the US, Australia and most European countries are regarded as individualist and also often described as industrialised and/or ‘Western’. But because ‘Western’ is a bit of an outdated term, we have preferred to use either ‘individualist’ or ‘industrialised’. However, things are rarely so simple and any attempt to divide the world into polar opposites cannot truly ref ect the di. erences that exist between cultures. 
Check it 
1. 
Explain what humanistic psychologists mean by ‘conditions of worth’. [3 marks] 

2. 
Outline and brie˜ y evaluate the in˜ uence of humanistic psychology on counselling. [5 marks] 

3. 
Discuss Maslow’s hierarchy of needs. Refer to self­actualisation in your answer. [8 marks] 

4. 
Outline humanistic psychology. Compare humanistic psychology with the psychodynamic approach. [16 marks AL] 


 Humanistic psychology // 123 
Comparison of approaches 

The specification says… 
Comparison of approaches. 

In this chapter, we have considered six of the major psychological approaches. Here, we outline some of the areas of agreement, disagreement, contention and overlap between these di.erent ways of viewing and explaining human behaviour. Our discussion is organised around fve themes: views on development, nature versus nurture, reductionism, determinism, explanation and treatment of psychological disorders. 
We also assess the benefts (and otherwise) of adopting an eclectic approach which aims to combine elements from di.erent approaches. 

overlap and agreement between approaches 
Although there are many signiÿcant differences between the theories and assumptions within each approach, there are some areas of overlap and ways in which approaches complement each other. 
You may recall how the social learning theory approach was described as a ‘bridge’ between the behaviourist and cognitive approaches because it emphasised the importance of learning from the environment as well as the role of mediating cognitive factors. 
The fusion of cognitive and biological approaches has led to the development of cognitive neuroscience – a sophisticated ÿeld that links mental states to biological structures. 
The psychodynamic approach shares much in common with the biological approach as both see biological drives and instincts as crucial determinants of human development. 
Finally, humanistic and psychodynamic approaches can both be reasonably described as person-centred in the way that they place subjective experience at the centre of their research. 
These are just some of the ways in which psychological approaches overlap. 
Question 
Select two or three approaches. Draw Venn diagrams  (see example below) to show the ways in which these approaches overlap and intersect. Use this page and the rest of the chapter to draw out the features and assumptions that different approaches have in common. 



Determinism 
Determinism is oft en confused with reductionism but is quite distinct from it – though many determinist explanations are also reductionist. Determinism proposes that all behaviour has an internal or external cause and is thus predictable. 
The behaviourist approach sees all behaviour as environmentally determined by external infl uences that we are unable to control (e.g. operant conditioning). The biological approach advocates a form of genetic determinism in its assumption that much of our behaviour is directed by innate infl uences. Psychic determinism is a key feature of the psychodynamic approach insofar as the unconscious forces that drive our behaviour are the ultimate cause of behaviour, and that these are simply rationalised by our conscious minds. 
The positions described above are known as hard determinism, the next two approaches take a less all-or-nothing view (soft  determinism). The cognitive approach suggests that we are the ‘choosers’ of our own thoughts and behaviours, yet these choices can only operate within the limits of what we know and have experienced. Social learning theorists, like Bandura, put forward the notion of reciprocal determinism – the idea that as well as being infl uenced by our environment, we also exert some infl uence upon it through the behaviours we choose to perform. Only humanistic psychology stands alone in its assertion that human beings have free will and operate as active agents who determine their own development. 
Explanation and treatment of psychological disorders 
The behaviourist model sees abnormality as arising from maladaptive or faulty learning in the sense that inappropriate or destructive patterns of behaviour have been reinforced. Behaviour therapies, such as systematic desensitisation, which aim to condition new, more healthy responses, have been applied successfully to the treatment of phobias. 
Social learning theory has had relatively little application to treatment, but the principles of modelling and observational learning have been used to explain how negative behaviours such as aggression may be learned through the infl uence of dysfunctional role models. 
Freud saw anxiety disorders as emerging from unconscious confl ict, childhood trauma and the overuse of defence mechanisms. Psychoanalysis has had some success as a therapy but it is not appropriate for everyone because it requires a considerable input from the patient in terms of time and also ability to talk about and refl ect on emotions. 
Cognitive therapy is much more eff ective and applicable, especially when combined with behaviour therapy as CBT (for example in the treatment of depression). It aims to identify and eradicate faulty thinking which is assumed to be the root cause of maladaptive behaviour. 
Also eff ective is humanistic therapy (or counselling) based on Rogers’ philosophy that closing the gap between the self-concept and the ideal self will increase self-esteem and stimulate personal growth. 
Finally, many would claim the biological approach has revolutionised the treatment of mental disorders through the development of drug therapy which regulates chemical imbalances in the brain. 
Idiographic and nomothetic approaches 
The six approaches are also divided in terms of whether they are attempting to establish general laws by studying large groups of people (nomothetic approach) or whether they are aiming to understand what makes individuals unique (idiographic approach). The former generally involves the use of the experimental method whereas the latter tends to be more concerned with in-depth qualitative methods such as case studies and unstructured interviews. 
Broadly speaking, the more scientiÿ c approaches – behaviourist, social learning theory, cognitive and biological – subscribe to the experimental nomothetic approach. However, the biological and cognitive approaches often draw upon data derived from case studies, especially those involving individuals with unusual abnormalities or deÿ cits (as in the case of HM in memory on page 51) – a more idiographic approach. The person-centred approaches – psychodynamic and humanistic – are idiographic in that they favour the case study method, usually carried out within clinical settings. 
Question 
What are the strengths and limitations of adopting: 
(a)
 An idiographic approach to human behaviour? 

(b)
 A nomothetic approach to human behaviour? 


To what extent is our behaviour dictated by forces beyond our control? 
The eclectic approach 
Many modern psychologists take a multidisciplinary approach to the study of human behaviour. Eclecticism in psychology refers to the combining of several approaches, methods and/or theoretical perspectives in order to provide a more comprehensive account of human behaviour. 
Such an ethos has proved fruitful in the ÿ eld of mental disorders. Combining treatment options from several different perspectives – such as drugs, cognitive therapy and family therapy – has led to more effective outcomes for people with schizophrenia and lower relapse rates (e.g. Stein and Test 1980). 
Many topic areas in psychology have also beneÿ tted from ‘interactionist’ theories that combine different levels of explanation. The diathesis-stress model in psychiatry accounts for the fact that many mental disorders are a complex interaction of biological predisposition and environmental triggers. Similarly, the biosocial approach rejects the traditional distinction between nature and nurture by explaining how basic biological differences are reinforced by the environment during gender development, for instance. 
Question 
Although there are obvious advantages associated with eclecticism in psychology, what issues/problems might such an approach present? 
Study tip 
You might enhance your understanding of the information on this spread by drawing a table with the six approaches across the top and the f ve themes covered on this spread down the side. Then summarise the information on this spread in relation to each approach. 
Check it 
1. 
Outline one way in which the behaviourist approach and social learning theory approach overlap. [2 marks] 

2. 
Explain two differences between the cognitive approach and humanistic psychology.  [6 marks] 

3. 
Outline the biological approach. Compare the biological approach with the cognitive approach.  [16 marks AL] 


 Comparison of approaches // 125 

Practical corner 
The specification says… 
Knowledge and understanding of … research methods, practical research skills and maths skills. These should be developed through … ethical practical research activities. 

This means that you should conduct practical investigations wherever possible. Here, we suggest an idea for an experiment that you might conduct related to the biological approach, as well as a demonstration of electrical transmission in the nervous system. There is also a naturalistic observation linked to your knowledge of learning approaches. 
Ethics check 
Ethics are discussed in detail on pages 178 179. We strongly suggest that you complete this checklist before collecting data. 
1. 
Do participants know participation is voluntary? 

2. 
Do participants know what to expect? 

3. 
Do participants know they can withdraw at any time? 

4. 
Are individuals’ results anonymous? 

5. 
Have I minimised the risk of distress to participants? 

6. 
Have I avoided asking sensitive questions? 

7. 
Will I avoid bringing my school/teacher/ psychology into disrepute? 

8. 
Have I considered all other ethical issues? 

9. 
Has my teacher approved this? 


Table 1 Results for an experiment on the 
effects of arousal. Condition A: Time in seconds to cross out e’s without an audience. 
Condition B: Time in seconds to cross out e’s with an audience. 

Participant  Condition A  Condition B  
1  56  52  
2  63  64  
3  60  48  
4  72  71  
5  57  46  
6  62  64  
7  70  53  
8  81  83  
9  50  54  
10  66  56  
Totals  
Standard deviation  8.9573  11.4450  

The maths bit 1 
1. 
In Table 1, what percentage of participants improved their performance with an audience? (1 mark) 

2. 
Using the data in Table 1, calculate the mean time it took to cross out letter e’s in Condition A and B. (2 marks) 

3. 
Explain one strength and one limitation of the mean as a measure of central tendency. (2.marks + 2 marks) 

4. 
Sketch a suitable graph to represent the mean values calculated in question 2. (3 marks) 

5. 
Give each standard deviation in Table 1 to one decimal place. (1 mark) 

6. 
What do the standard deviations tell us about the spread of data in each condition? (2 marks) 


126 //  Chapter 4 Approaches in Psychology 





1. 
Using the data in Table 2, calculate the total number of times Table 2 Data collected for frequency of active and passive play between active play was observed in adult–boy pairs and in adult–girl adult–girl pairs and adult–boy pairs. pairs. Do the same for passive play. (2 marks) 

2. 
Draw a bar chart to show the difference in active play and passive play for adult–girl pairs and adult–boy pairs. (3 marks) 

3. 
Explain one conclusion that can be drawn from the bar chart you have drawn. (2 marks) 

4. 
Identify the type of data in Table 2. Explain one limitation of using this type of data. (1 mark + 2 marks)


Type of play  
Active play  Passive play  
Running  Shouting  Physical contact  Sitting  Talking  No physical contact  
Adult–boy pair  11  8  5  3  2  3  
Adult–girl pair  4  3  5  5  6  3  

 Practical corner // 127 
Revision summaries 





Evaluation 
Cognitive factors 
More comprehensive account of learning 
than proposed by the behaviourist approach. Counterpoint – underestimates influence of biology, social learning involves mirror neurons in the brain. 
Contrived lab studies 
Demand characteristics (Bobo doll is designed to be hit), so low validity. 
Real-world application 
SLT can account for development of cultural differences e.g. in gender role. 
Evaluation extra: Reciprocal determinism 
Less determinist than behaviourism (reciprocal determinism). 

Evaluation 
We’re going to go back in time. 
Wundt and introspection Evaluation The emergence of Psychology as a science Evaluation 
The approach 
Assumptions 
Observable behaviour is all that is needed to be studied. Basic processes same in all species. 
Classical conditioning – Pavlov 
Research on salivation in dogs. Association of UCS with NS to produce new CS and CR. 
Operant conditioning – Skinner 
Research with rats and pigeons in 
Skinner box. Animal operates on the environment, behaviour shaped by consequences. 
Reinforcement (positive and negative). Punishment. 

Science involves systematic and objective measurement to discover general laws. 
1900s Behaviourists 
Researchers (e.g. Watson and Skinner) conducted controlled experiments on behaviours that were directly observable. 
1950s Cognitive approach 
Made the study of the mind legitimate and scientific, experiments tested the computer metaphor (e.g. multi-store model). 
1980s Biological approach 
Observable behaviours studied, using controlled measures e.g. fMRI. Also genetic testing studies relationship between genes and behaviour. 
The study of internal mental processes. 
The approach 
Assumptions Scientific methods 
Internal mental processes can be studied through inference. Lab studies to produce reliable, objective data. 
Modern psychology 
Learning, cognitive and biological approaches all use scientific methods e.g. lab research. 
Subjective data 
Humanistic and psychodynamic approaches rely on unscientific case studies. Research hampered by demand characteristics. 
Evaluation extra: Paradigm 
The question of whether psychology has agreed methods and assumptions is open to debate. 
The role of schema 
Beliefs and expectations affect thoughts and behaviour. Innate (e.g. sucking schema) or learned. Mental shortcut, leads to perceptual errors. 
Theoretical and computer models 
Information processing approach. Mind is likened to a computer and applied to artificial intelligence. 
The emergence of cognitive neuroscience 
Scientific study of how brain structures affect mental processes. Biological structures link to mental states e.g. Broca. Brain imaging (e.g. fMRI) used to read the brain. 
Cognitive neuroscience is scientific. Counterpoint – use of inference and artificial stimuli lead to low external validity. 
Real-world application 
Successfully applied to the fields of artificial intelligence, depression and eyewitness testimony. 
Machine reductionism 
Computer analogy is too simple, it ignores the influence of emotion e.g. effect of anxiety on eyewitness testimony. 
Evaluation extra: Soft determinism 
Cognitive approach is an example of soft determinism, a middle-ground and more reasonable than behaviourism. 



Everything psychological is at ÿ rst biological. 
The approach  Evaluation  
Assumptions  Real-world application  
The mind and body are one and the same.  Understanding of biochemical processes is associated  
The neurochemical basis of behaviour Thought and behaviour depend on chemicals (neurotransmitters e.g. serotonin).  with the development of psychoactive drugs. Counterpoint – antidepressants do not work for everyone (Cipriani et al.).  
The genetic basis of behaviour Concordance between MZ and DZ twins shows genetic basis of psychological characteristics.  Scientific methods Precise and objective methods e.g. scanning techniques such as fMRI and EEGs.  
Genotype and phenotype Genes versus expression of genes in environment (nature and nurture).  Biological determinism Sees human behaviour as governed by internal genetically-determined factors, an oversimplification.  
Evaluation extra: Natural selection  
Evolution and behaviour Natural selection of genes based on survival value and, ultimately, reproductive success.  Popper claims theory of natural selection can’t be falsified, but fossil record is supportive.  

The nervous system 
Nervous system 
A specialised network of cells, fast-acting and electrical (and chemical) internal communication system. 
Central nervous system (CNS) 
Brain – divided into hemispheres, cerebral cortex (outer layer), 3 mm thick. Spinal cord – connects brain to PNS, 
Peripheral nervous system (PNS) 
Autonomic nervous system (ANS) – 
governs vital functions. Somatic nervous system (SNS) – muscle movement, sensory information. 
.refl exes 
The endocrine system 
Glands and hormones 
Glands produce hormones. Hormones distributed in bloodstream, 
e.g. thyroid gland produces thyroxine. Pituitary is the master gland. 
Fight or flight 
Sympathetic arousal: hypothalamus + 
pituitary ˜ adrenal gland ˜ adrenaline. Adrenaline leads to increased heart rate, faster breathing, sweating, inhibits digestion. 
Immediate and automatic. Parasympathetic state – once threat has passed, body returns to rest and digest. 

axons. 
Relay – sensory to motor or other, short – short. Motor – CNS to effectors, short – long. 
Structure of a neuron 
Cell body contains nucleus, has dendrites. Axon covered in myelin sheath divided by nodes of Ranvier. 
Electrical transmission 
Positive charge leads to action potential. 

Neurotransmitter released from synaptic vesicle into synapse, taken up by postsynaptic receptor site on receiving dendrite. 
Neurotransmitters 
Specialist functions e.g. acetylcholine for muscle contraction. 
Excitation and inhibition 
Adrenaline is excitatory, serotonin is inhibitory. 
Summation 
Impulses are ‘added up’, net effect is excitatory or inhibitory. 


Behaviour is determined by unconscious forces that we cannot control. 

The approach 
The role of the unconscious Real-world application 
The conscious mind is the ‘tip of the iceberg’. New form of therapy (psychoanalysis), forerunner to ‘talking therapies’. 
The structure of personality 
Counterpoint – not suitable for all mental Id – primitive part, pleasure principle. 
disorders (e.g. not for schizophrenia). Ego – reality principle, protected by defence mechanisms. Explanatory power 
Influential theories about personality, wrong, morality principle. 
Superego – formed age 5, sense of right and moral development and gender identity. 
Untestable concepts Psychosexual stages 
Much of the theory is unfalsifiable, leads to fixations. 
Five stages, a different conflict at each stage and based on case studies, thus pseudoscientifi c. 
Defence mechanisms Evaluation extra: Psychic determinism 
Used by the Ego to keep the Id ‘in check’ and reduce anxiety – repression, denial, 
All behaviour is driven by the displacement. 
unconscious, leaves no room for free will. 

Emerged as the third force in psychology. 
The approach 
Free will Not reductionist 
People are active agents who are self-determining. 
Emphasis placed on the whole person (holism). 
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs 
Counterpoint – concepts can’t be 5 levels – physiological, safety and security, love observed or measured, so approach and belongingness, self-esteem, self-actualisation. 
lacks empirical evidence. 
Self-actualisation Positive approach 
An innate tendency to want to reach your Optimistic approach that sees people potential. 
as basically good and in control. 
The self, congruence and conditions of worth Cultural bias 
Personal growth requires congruence between Associated with individualism. 
self and ideal self. 
Evaluation extra: Limited application Counselling psychology 
Critics claim little impact but Counsellor is genuine, empathic, unconditional revolutionised therapy (counselling), positive regard (Rogers). Maslow’s hierarchy explains motivation. 


 Revision summaries // 129 
Practice questions, answers and feedback 

On this spread we look at some typical student answers to questions. The comments provided indicate what is good and bad in each answer. Learning how to produce effective question answers is a SKILL. Read pages 213 223 for guidance. 
 Practice questions, answers and feedback // 131 
’ 
’ 
= 
’ 
‘ 
’ 
 Multiple-choice questions // 133 


 Storm and strife and stress, Lost in a wilderness, Groping to find a way, Forth to the haunts of day Sudden a vista peeps, Out of the tangled deeps, Only a point – the ray But at the end is day. Dark is the dawn and chill, Daylight is on the hill, Night is the flitting breath, Day rides the hills of death. 

Paul Laurence Dunbar 




Contents 
Deÿnitions of abnormality (1) 136 Deÿnitions of abnormality (2) 138 Phobias 140 Depression 142 Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) 144 The behavioural approach to: 
Explaining phobias 146 Treating phobias 148 
The cognitive approach to: Explaining depression 150 Treating depression 152 
The biological approach to: Explaining OCD 154 Treating OCD 156 
Practical corner 158 Revision summaries 160 Practice questions, answers and feedback 162 Multiple-choice questions 164 



Chapter 5 Contents // 135 

Definitions of abnormality (1) 
The specification says… 
Definitions of abnormality, including 
statistical infrequency and deviation from 
social norms. 
This chapter is concerned with psychopathology, which is the study of psychological disorder – psycho for psychological and pathology, which means the study of the causes of diseases. 
How can we decide if a person’s behaviour and/or psychological state are su.  ciently unusual (i.e. abnormal) to justify diagnosing and treating them for a psychological disorder? On this spread we consider two methods used to make this decision: statistical infrequency and deviation from social norms. 
Key terms 
Statistical infrequency˜Occurs when an individual has a less common characteristic, for example being more depressed or less intelligent than most of the population. 
Deviation from social norms˜Concerns behaviour that is di. erent from the accepted standards of behaviour in a community or society. 
3 2  The normal distribution of IQ scores. There is more about normal distributions on page 197.  
1  

60 70 80 90 100 110 120 130 140 
IQ 
Mark 
Mark is a practising Pagan (i.e. a follower of a pre-Christian religion). He lives alone and works as an IT consultant, doing most of his work at home and communicating via the Internet. His IQ is 145 (placing him in the top 1% of the population) and measures of depression are around average. 
Questions 
1. 
Based on statistical infrequency and deviation from social norms, would you say that there is a case for judging Mark to be abnormal? Explain your answer. 

2. 
Why is there a good case for not classifying Mark as abnormal at all? 


Statistical infrequency 
Perhaps the most obvious way to defi ne anything as ‘normal’ or ‘abnormal’ is according to how oft en we come across it. Statistics are about numbers. According to the statistical defi nition any relatively usual behaviour or characteristic can be thought of as ‘normal’, and any behaviour that is unusual is ‘abnormal’. This is what is meant by statistical infrequency. We can, for example, say that at any one time only a small number of people will have an irrational fear of buttons or believe for no good reason that their neighbours are zombies. 
Example: IQ and intellectual disability disorder 
This statistical approach comes into its own when we are dealing with characteristics that can be reliably measured, for example intelligence. We know that, in any human characteristic, the majority of people’s scores will cluster around the average, and that the further we go above or below that average, the fewer people will attain that score. This is called the normal distribution. You can see the normal distribution of IQ below left . 
The average IQ is set at 100. In a normal distribution, most people (68%) have a score (in this case IQ) in the range from 85 to 115. Only 2% of people have a score below 70. Those individuals scoring below 70 are very unusual or ‘abnormal’, and are liable to receive a diagnosis of a psychological disorder – intellectual disability disorder (IDD). 
Deviation from social norms 
Most of us notice people whose behaviour represents a deviation from social norms, i.e. when a person behaves in a way that is diff erent from how we expect people to behave. Groups of people (hence ‘social’) choose to defi ne behaviour as abnormal on the basis that it off ends their sense of what is ‘acceptable’ or the norm. We are making a collective judgement as a society about what is right. 
Norms are specif c to the culture we live in 
Of course those social norms may be diff erent for each generation and diff erent in every culture, so there are relatively few behaviours that would be considered universally abnormal on the basis that they breach social norms. For example, homosexuality was considered abnormal in our culture in the past and continues to be viewed as abnormal (and illegal) in some cultures (e.g. in April 2019, Brunei introduced new laws that make sex between men an off ence punishable by stoning to death). 
Example: antisocial personality disorder 
A person with antisocial personality disorder (psychopathy) is impulsive, aggressive and irresponsible. According to the DSM-5 (the manual used by psychiatrists to diagnose mental disorder) one important symptom of antisocial personality disorder is an ‘absence of prosocial internal standards associated with failure to conform to lawful and culturally normative ethical behaviour’. 
In other words we are making the social judgement that psychopaths are abnormal because they don’t conform to our moral standards. Psychopathic behaviour would be considered abnormal in a very wide range of cultures. 
Amanda 
Human characteristics are normally distributed, with most people clustering around the mean and small numbers of people at the extremes.  
Amanda has poor social skills and is referred to a clinical psychologist. The psychologist assesses her and shows her where her skills fall on the normal distribution. The mean score on this test is 50. Amanda scores 21. 
mean 
SD stands for standard deviation.  
About 68% of the population lies between  -2 SD -1 SD  +1 SD +2 SD  
+1 and –1 SD.  Amanda’s score  
About 95% of the population lies between  
+2 and –2 SD.  
30  40  50  60  70  
Questions  

1. 
Estimate where Amanda’s social skills fall in the population. (2 marks) 

2. 
Based on this statistical distribution, should Amanda be considered abnormal? Explain your answer. (2 marks) 


Population % 






The ultimate aim of defning abnormality is to use these concepts to help classify mental disorders and diagnose people experiencing mental health problems. 
First we have to decide what counts as a mental disorder. Some people can be 






Definitions of abnormality (2) 

The specification says… 
Definitions of abnormality, including 
failure to function adequately and 
deviation from ideal mental health. 

On the previous spread we considered ways to identify when a person’s behaviour and/ or mental state is su.ciently unusual to justify diagnosing them with and treating them for a mental disorder. Two further defnitions of abnormality are identifed in the specifcation and explained on this spread – failure to function adequately and deviation from ideal mental health. 
Key terms 

Failure to function adequately˜Occurs when someone is unable to cope with ordinary demands of day-to-day living. 
less inclined to classify people as abnormal simply on the basis of one deÿnition. 
For example, we used to deÿne paraphilias (unusual sexual behaviours) on the basis that they were deviations from social norms. This meant, for example, that when homosexuality was less socially acceptable it was classiÿed as a paraphilia. 
This would not happen now. In the DSM-5 system paraphilias are only classiÿed as mental disorders if they involve harm or distress to the person themselves or other people. So exhibitionism (°ashing), paedophilia (attraction to children) and frotteurism (rubbing up against people in public) are still considered abnormal because they cause harm and distress as well as being deviations from social norms. Consensual sadomasochism and transvestitism (cross-dressing) are no longer classiÿed as abnormal simply because they deviate from social norms. 
Question 
Explain how our modern understanding of paraphilia is based on several of the deÿnitions considered on this spread and the previous spread. 
Study tip 
We have covered four defnitions altogether. It is most important that you know all four of these defnitions – and important that you can give a detailed explanation of each one. 
One way of providing detail is to use examples so don’t ignore these. 
One other word of advice – a good way of demonstrating your understanding is being able to apply it to cases like that of Pondlife (facing page), so make sure you can answer our questions on applying it. 
138 //  Chapter 5 Psychopathology 



Phobias 
The specification says… 
The behavioural, emotional and cognitive characteristics of phobias. 

In your course you will focus on three examples of mental disorder: phobias, depression and obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD). This spread is concerned with signs and symptoms of phobias. These include the ways in which people experiencing a phobia behave, think and feel in relation to the phobic stimulus, i.e. the thing they are afraid of. 
Key terms 

Phobia˜An irrational fear of an object or situation. 
Behavioural˜Ways in which people act. 
Emotional˜Related to a person’s feelings or mood. 
Cognitive˜Refers to the process of ‘knowing’, including thinking, reasoning, remembering, believing. 
The DSM system 
There are a number of systems for classifying and diagnosing mental health problems. Perhaps the best known is the DSM. This stands for Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorder and is published by the American Psychiatric Association. 
The DSM is updated every so often as ideas about abnormality change. The current version is the 5th edition so it is commonly called the DSM-5. This was published in 2013. 

When we think of phobias in everyday life we tend to have in mind fairly mild fears – such as avoiding snakes or spiders. However, where phobias have been diagnosed as a mental disorder (called clinical phobias), it can be disabling and cause tremendous distress. In fact a clinical phobia is only diagnosed if anxiety is considerable and it impacts on the person’s life. Consider the case of Padraig. 
Padraig is a psychology undergraduate. He experiences gynophobia – a phobia of women. This is an unusual condition and one which Padraig ÿnds causes offence to many people he meets. Others don’t take it seriously and laugh at Padraig. Padraig ÿnds his studies very difÿcult because most of the students on his course are women. 
His social life is limited because the people he likes best at university all hang out in mixed-gender groups. This causes Padraig severe distress and he feels guilty – he does not dislike women, he is just very anxious around them. His self-esteem is low and this is made worse by the fact that Padraig has no idea where his phobia comes from. 
Question 
Consider each of the four deÿnitions of abnormality you have studied. For each one explain how Padraig would be judged as abnormal. 

Agoraphobia is an excessive fear of being outside or in a public place. This can be disabling to the extent that the person cannot leave their home. 




Eloise and the buttons 
Young children are prone to phobias, including some that may appear downright odd to older people. One phobic stimulus is buttons. 
Eloise has a phobia of buttons. She refuses to wear any clothes with buttons and she even refuses to go into clothes shops where there are likely to be clothes with buttons. When questioned, Eloise says that this is because of the extreme anxiety that buttons cause her. She also says that she believes that buttons will pinch her skin and that this will leave a bruise. 
Questions 
1. 
Identify the behavioural, emotional and cognitive aspects of Eloise’s fear. 

2. 
Conduct your own research and ÿnd another speciÿc phobia. What behaviours, emotions and cognitions characterise it? 


A speciÿc phobia. There are people who fear buttons and people who fear belly buttons. To an omphalophobic, belly buttons may appear ugly. This is an example of a cognitive distortion. 


Depression 
The specification says… 
The behavioural, emotional and cognitive characteristics of depression. 

This spread is concerned with signs and symptoms of depression. Where phobias are characterised by anxiety, depression is characterised by a low mood – it belongs to the general category of ‘mood disorders’. 
Key terms 

Depression˜A mental disorder characterised by low mood and low energy levels. 
Behavioural˜Ways in which people act. 
Emotional˜Related to a person’s feelings or mood. 
Cognitive˜Refers to the process of ‘knowing’, including thinking, reasoning, remembering, believing. 



Sadra is a 20-year-old university student. Her parents have been very worried since she returned home for a holiday. They hear Sadra up late into the night and also notice that she appears to have lost quite a lot of weight. She is very sensitive when asked about this and snaps at her parents. 
During one argument Sadra says that she hates her parents and herself. In another argument she says that she doesn’t enjoy university and also hates visiting her family. She shows no enthusiasm about returning to university after the holiday and has been unable to concentrate on a piece of coursework she has brought home to work on. 
Questions 
1. 
Identify the behavioural, emotional and cognitive aspects of Sadra’s state. 

2. 
Based on these characteristics, should Sadra’s parents be concerned that she may be experiencing depression? Explain your answer. 


Emotional characteristics of depression 
Lowered mood 
When we use the word ‘depressed’ in everyday life we are usually describing having a lowered mood, in other words feeling sad. As you can see from the rest of this spread there is more to clinical depression than this. 
Lowered mood is still a defi ning emotional element of depression but it is more pronounced than in the daily kind of experience of feeling lethargic and sad. People with depression oft en describe themselves as ‘worthless’ and ‘empty’. 
Anger 
Although people with depression tend to experience more negative emotions and fewer positive ones during episodes of depression, this experience of negative emotion is not limited to sadness. People with depression also frequently experience anger, sometimes extreme anger. This can be directed at the self or others. On occasion such emotions lead to aggressive or self-harming behaviour – which is why this characteristic appears under behavioural characteristics as well. 
Lowered self-esteem 
Self-esteem is the emotional experience of how much we like ourselves. People with depression tend to report reduced self-esteem, in other words they like themselves less than usual. This can be quite extreme, with some people with depression describing a sense of self-loathing, i.e. hating themselves. 
Cognitive characteristics of depression 
The cognitive aspect of depression is concerned with the ways in which people process information. People experiencing depression or who have experienced depression tend to process information about several aspects of the world quite diff erently from the ‘normal’ ways that people without depression think. 
Poor concentration 
Depression is associated with poor levels of concentration. The person may fi nd themselves unable to stick with a task as they usually would, or they might fi nd it hard to make decisions that they would normally fi nd straightforward. Poor concentration and poor decision-making are likely to interfere with the individual’s work. 
Attending to and dwelling on the negative 
When experiencing a depressive episode people are inclined to pay more attention to negative aspects of a situation and ignore the positives. In other words they tend to see a glass as half-empty rather than half-full. 
People with depression also have a bias towards recalling unhappy events rather than happy ones – the opposite bias that most people have when not depressed. 
Absolutist thinking 
Most situations are not all-good or all-bad, but when a person is depressed they tend to think in these terms. This is sometimes called ‘black-and-white thinking’. This means that when a situation is unfortunate they tend to see it as an absolute disaster. 
Oona 
Some doctors consider weight change as a result of depression to be 
signiÿ cant when a person gains or loses 5% of their body weight. 
Oona normally weighs 10 stone exactly. Her current weight is nine 
stone six pounds. 
Questions 
1. 
Approximately what percentage of her body weight has Oona lost? (1°mark) 

2. 
Is this weight change likely to be seen as clinically signiÿ cant? Explain your answer. (2 marks) 


Case study: Dai 
Most of us would describe ourselves as feeling ’depressed’ at some point in our lives and possibly may feel depressed relatively frequently. What we are usually describing is a feeling of being ‘a bit down’, a normal variation in mood. However, clinical depression can be a severe condition, as illustrated in the case of Dai. 
Dai is 27. In most cases depression appears between the ages of 20 and 40. He has been experiencing very severe depression for some time. Although depression itself is not particularly unusual, depression as severe as Dai’s is rare. 
His depression was ÿ rst diagnosed 18 months ago when he failed to ‘bounce back’ after the death of his mother. Dai has been unable to work for the last year and he has not felt able to get out of bed for several weeks now. 
His doctor prescribed some drugs and arranged for psychotherapy but neither has really made any difference. Although on long-term sick leave, Dai no longer receives sick pay and his employer is about to dismiss him, declaring him unÿ t to work. 
Dai’s family is concerned about his reputation in their community if he has to live on beneÿ ts. Dai’s mood and self-esteem are very low and he experiences periodic anxiety as well. 
Question 
Consider each of the four deÿ nitions of abnormality you have studied. For each one consider in what way Dai would be judged as abnormal. 
Most of us see the glass as half-full but when in a depressive episode we are more likely to see it as half-empty. 
Check it 
1. 
Outline behavioural characteristics of depression. [3 marks] 

2. 
Outline emotional characteristics of depression. 


[3 marks] 
3. Outline cognitive characteristics of depression. 
[3 marks] 
4. Outline what is meant by ‘depression’. [2 marks] 
 Depression // 143 
Obsessive-compulsive  disorder (OCD) 
The specification says… 
The behavioural, emotional and cognitive characteristics 
of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). 
The third mental disorder in the specif cation is obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD). This involves anxiety (similar to phobias) and irrational thinking (similar to depression). 
Key terms 
OCD (obsessive-compulsive disorder)˜A condition characterised by obsessions and/or compulsive behaviour. Obsessions are cognitive whereas compulsions are behavioural. 
Behavioural˜Ways in which people act. 
Emotional˜Related to a person’s feelings or mood. 
Cognitive˜Refers to the process of ‘knowing’, including thinking, reasoning, remembering, believing. 
Study tip 
When describing OCD, students often f nd it di.  cult to distinguish between obsessions and compulsions. It may help you to be clear that: 
•
 A compulsion is a behaviour, i.e. it is something you do. 

• 
An obsession is a cognition, i.e. it takes place in the mind. 


Jez 
Jez experiences OCD. He described his condition as follows: 
I’m constantly anxious about catching diseases from other people. I can’t get thoughts and pictures of dirt out of my mind. Every day I clean my whole house and wash my hands hundreds of times. When anyone comes to the house I make them wash their hands before I can go near them. I know this is ridiculous but I can’t help it – it makes me feel better, but only for a little while. 
Questions 
1. 
Identify the behavioural, emotional and cognitive aspects of Jez’s state. 

2. 
At the top of the facing page OCD is illustrated as a cycle. Use this to describe Jez’s OCD as a cycle. 


Compulsive handwashing is a typical feature of OCD. 
DSM-5 categories of OCD 
The DSM system recognises OCD and a range of related disorders. What these disorders all have in common is repetitive behaviour accompanied by obsessive thinking. 
• 
OCD – characterised by either obsessions (recurring thoughts, images, etc.) and/or compulsions (repetitive behaviours such as handwashing). Most people with a diagnosis of OCD have both obsessions and compulsions. 

• 
Trichotillomania – compulsive hair-pulling. 

• 
Hoarding disorder – the compulsive gathering of possessions and the inability to part with anything, regardless of its value. 

• 
Excoriation disorder – compulsive skin-picking. 


Behavioural characteristics of OCD 
The behavioural component of OCD is compulsive behaviour. There are two elements to compulsive behaviours. 
Compulsions are repetitive 
Typically people with OCD feel compelled to repeat a behaviour. A common example is handwashing. Other common compulsive repetitions include counting, praying and tidying/ordering groups of objects such as CD collections (for those who have them) or containers in a food cupboard. 
Compulsions reduce anxiety 
Around 10% of people with OCD show compulsive behaviour alone – they have no obsessions, just a general sense of irrational anxiety. However, for the vast majority, compulsive behaviours are performed in an attempt to manage the anxiety produced by obsessions. For example, compulsive handwashing is carried out as a response to an obsessive fear of germs. Compulsive checking, for example that a door is locked or a gas appliance is switched off , is in response to the obsessive thought that it might have been left  unsecured. 
Avoidance 
The behaviour of people with OCD may also be characterised by their avoidance as they attempt to reduce anxiety by keeping away from situations that trigger it. 
People with OCD tend to try to manage their OCD by avoiding situations that trigger anxiety. For example, people who wash compulsively may avoid coming into contact with germs. However, this avoidance can lead people to avoid very ordinary situations, such as emptying their rubbish bins, and this can in itself interfere with leading a regular life. 
Bar chart 
Most people with OCD experience both obsessions and compulsions – 10% experience compulsions alone and 20% experience obsessions alone. 
Question 
On a bar chart, plot the percentages for those experiencing 
(a) obsessions only, (b) compulsion only and (c) obsession + compulsion 
(you have to work this out!). Make sure that you follow the conventions of bar charts: 
• 
Bars should not touch. 

• 
Axes need to be labelled. 

• 
The graph should have an appropriate scale. 

• 
It should also have a suitable title. (4 marks) 




was a teenager, when her parents separated. Only 1–2% of the population experiences clinical OCD, making it fairly unusual. 
Like most people with OCD Sarita has both compulsive behaviours and obsessions. She has obsessive thoughts of dirt and a compulsion to wash her hands every time she touches something that might be dirty. 
As a new mother, Sarita experiences difÿculty because her obsession with dirt makes it very hard for her to change nappies. She is often alone with her baby as her husband works so, in the daytime, this is a real problem. 
The other local mothers ÿnd Sarita’s OCD hard to understand and she wonders whether they see her as a bad mother. This in turn has led to Sarita experiencing low self-esteem. She is now receiving support from Children’s Services. 
Question 
Consider each of the four deÿnitions of abnormality you have studied. For each one consider in what way Sarita would be judged as abnormal. 

3. 
Outline cognitive characteristics of OCD. [3 marks] 

4. 
Outline what is meant by ‘OCD’. [2 marks] 


 Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) // 145 
The behavioural approach to explaining phobias 
The specification says… 
The two-process model 
The behavioural approach to explaining phobias: the two-process model, including 
The behavioural approach emphasises the role of learning in the acquisition of behaviour. The 
classical and operant conditioning. 
approach focuses on behaviour – what we can see. On page 140 we identifi ed the key behavioural aspects of phobias – panic, avoidance and endurance. The behavioural approach is geared towards 
Psychologists are interested in explaining what 
explaining these rather than the cognitive and emotional aspects of phobias. 
leads a person to develop a mental disorder 
Orval Hobart Mowrer (1960) proposed the two-process model based on the behavioural 
and using such explanations as the basis of treatments. One of the key explanations for 
approach to phobias. This states that phobias are acquired (learned in the fi rst place) by classical phobias is the behavioural approach – that conditioning and then continue because of operant conditioning. phobias can be learned by classical conditioning 
Acquisition by classical conditioning 
and maintained by operant conditioning. 
Classical conditioning involves learning to associate something of which we initially have no fear Key terms (called a neutral stimulus) with something that already triggers a fear response (known as an unconditioned stimulus). Behavioural (behaviourist) approach˜A way John Watson and Rosalie Rayner (1920) created a phobia in a 9-month-old baby called ‘Little of explaining behaviour in terms of what is 
Albert’. Albert showed no unusual anxiety at the start of the study. When shown a white rat he 
observable and in terms of learning. 
tried to play with it. However, the experimenters then set out to give Albert a phobia. Whenever the rat was presented to Albert the researchers made a loud, frightening noise by banging an 
Two-process model˜An explanation for the onset 
iron bar close to Albert’s ear. This noise is an unconditioned stimulus (UCS) which creates an 
and persistence of disorders that create anxiety, 
unconditioned response (UCR) of fear. When the rat (a neutral stimulus, NS) and the UCS are 
such as phobias. The two processes are classical conditioning for onset and operant conditioning encountered close together in time the NS becomes associated with the UCS and both now for persistence. produce the fear response – Albert displayed fear when he saw a rat (the NS). The rat is now a learned or conditioned stimulus (CS) that produces a conditioned response (CR).
Classical conditioning˜Learning by association. 
This conditioning then generalised to similar objects. They tested Albert by showing him other 
Occurs when two stimuli are repeatedly paired 
furry objects such as a non-white rabbit, a fur coat and Watson wearing a Santa Claus beard 
together – an unconditioned (unlearned) 
made out of cotton balls. Little Albert displayed distress at the sight of all of these. 
stimulus (UCS) and a new ‘neutral’ stimulus (NS). The neutral stimulus eventually produces Maintenance by operant conditioning the same response that was f rst produced by the 
Responses acquired by classical conditioning usually tend to decline over time. However, phobias 
unconditioned (unlearned) stimulus alone. 
are oft en long-lasting. Mowrer has explained this as the result of operant conditioning. Operant conditioning˜A form of learning in Operant conditioning takes place when our behaviour is reinforced (rewarded) or punished. which behaviour is shaped and maintained Reinforcement tends to increase the frequency of a behaviour. This is true of both negative by its consequences. Possible consequences reinforcement and positive reinforcement. In the case of negative reinforcement an individual of behaviour include positive reinforcement, avoids a situation that is unpleasant. Such a behaviour results in a desirable consequence, which 
negative reinforcement or punishment. 
means the behaviour will be repeated. Mowrer suggested that whenever we avoid a phobic stimulus we successfully escape the fear and anxiety that we would have experienced if we had remained there. This reduction in fear 
People may acquire and maintain a phobia of dogs if they 
reinforces the avoidance behaviour and so the phobia is maintained. 
have a bad experience with an animal. Both classical and operant conditioning are involved.
 Zelda Nasim 
Zelda has a phobia of dogs. As Agoraphobia is an extreme fear of leaving one’s own a child she was once bitten by a home. This is a serious problem because it prevents dog belonging to a family friend. the person going about their regular daily life. Now when she thinks about 
Nasim has agoraphobia. He is a keen A level student dogs she experiences anxiety but is struggling to attend college because of the and she becomes very afraid acute anxiety he experiences when attempting to whenever she sees a dog near leave his house in the morning. His phobia began her. This is particularly bad when shortly after being mugged. Actually Nasim ÿ nds he she is approached by a German can leave his house as long as someone else is with Shepherd. Zelda avoids dogs him, but his parents leave for work early and he lives whenever possible. 
in the opposite direction of college from his friends. 
Question Questions
Using the two-process model 
1. Explain how Nasim’s agoraphobia might have explain how Zelda might have been acquired and maintained according to the acquired her phobia and how it two-process model. 
might be maintained. Refer to the processes of classical and operant 2. Evaluate the two-process model as an explanation conditioning in your answer. of Nasim’s condition. 




The behavioural approach to treating phobias 
The specification says… 
The behavioural approach to treating phobias: systematic desensitisation, including relaxation and use of hierarchy; flooding. 


Psychologists are interested in explaining why phobias develop but also in understanding how to treat them. The specifcation identifes two behavioural methods used in the treatment of phobias. 
Key terms 

Systematic desensitisation (SD) A  behavioural therapy designed to reduce an unwanted response, such as anxiety. SD involves drawing up a hierarchy of anxiety-provoking situations related to a person’s phobic stimulus, teaching the person to relax, and then exposing them to phobic situations. The person works their way through the hierarchy whilst maintaining relaxation. 
Flooding˜A behavioural therapy in which a person with a phobia is exposed to an extreme form of a phobic stimulus in order to reduce anxiety triggered by that stimulus. This takes place across a small number of long therapy sessions. 


Dog gone good 
Craig Newman and Katie Adams (2004) outlined the anxiety hierarchy they used to treat a phobia of dogs in a teenage boy with learning diÿculties. 
1. 
Introduction to dogs in photographs. 

2. 
Dogs introduced without direct access. 

3. 
Dog introduced to the same room. 

4. 
Dog introduced to personal space on lead. 

5. 
Loose dog introduced through a window. 

6. 
Loose dog introduced but blocked by waist-high object. 

7. 
Loose dog in the same room. 

8. 
Repeated with di.erent dogs. 

9. 
Observe loose dogs in a park from a distance. 



Emily has a phobia of cats. This is inconvenient as several of her friends have cats and she ÿnds it hard to visit them because of her anxiety. 
Questions 
1. 
Consider how Emily could be treated by systematic desensitisation. 

2. 
Explain how she could be treated by °ooding. 

3. 
Emily can’t decide which therapy might be best for her. What would you advise her about choosing between the two treatments? 



Evaluation 
Evidence of effectiveness 
One strength of systematic desensitisation (SD) is the evidence base for its eff ectiveness. 
Lisa Gilroy et al. (2003) followed up 42 people who had SD for spider phobia in three 45-minute sessions. At both three and 33 months, the SD group were less fearful than a control group treated by relaxation without exposure. In a recent review Theresa Wechsler et al. (2019) concluded that SD is eff ective for specifi c phobia, social phobia and agoraphobia. 
This means that SD is likely to be helpful for people with phobias. 
Clinical trial 
The bar chart below shows the symptom prevalence for groups of clients treated by ° ooding, systematic desensitisation and kept on a waiting list (a control condition). 
Bar chart showing the effectiveness of treatment for specifi c phobias. 
100 
People with learning disabilities 
A further strength of SD is that it can be used to help people with learning disabilities. 
Some people requiring treatment for phobias also have a learning disability. However, the main alternatives to SD are not suitable. People with learning disabilities oft en struggle with cognitive therapies that require complex rational thought. They may also feel confused and distressed by the traumatic experience of fl ooding. 
This means that SD is oft en the most appropriate treatment for people with learning 
% of clients with symptoms following treatment 
75 
50 
25 
0 
control systematic fooding 
disabilities who have phobias. 
Evaluation eXtra 
SD in virtual reality 
Traditional SD involves exposure to the phobic stimulus in a real-world setting. However there are advantages to conducting the exposure part of SD in virtual reality (VR). Exposure through VR can be used to avoid dangerous situations (e.g. heights) and is cost-eff ective because the psychologist and client need not leave the consulting room. 
On the other hand there is some evidence to suggest that VR exposure may be less eff ective than real exposure for social phobias because it lacks realism (Wechsler et al. 2019). 
Consider: Should clinical psychologists use VR for exposure? 
Evaluation 
Cost-effective 
One strength of fl ooding is that it is highly cost-eff ective. 
Clinical eff ectiveness means how eff ective a therapy is at tackling symptoms. However when we provide therapies in health systems like the NHS we also need to think about how much they cost. A therapy is cost-eff ective if it is clinically eff ective and not expensive. Flooding can work in as little as one session as opposed to say, ten sessions for SD to achieve the same result. Even allowing for a longer session (perhaps three hours) this makes fl ooding more cost-eff ective. 
This means that more people can be treated at the same cost with fl ooding than with SD or other therapies. 
Traumatic 
One limitation of fl ooding is that it is a highly unpleasant experience. 
Confronting one’s phobic stimulus in an extreme form provokes tremendous anxiety. Sarah Schumacher et al. (2015) found that participants and therapists rated fl ooding as signifi cantly more stressful than SD. This raises the ethical issue for psychologists of knowingly causing stress to their clients, although this is not a serious issue provided they obtain informed consent. More seriously, the traumatic nature of fl ooding means that attrition (dropout) rates are higher than for SD. 
This suggests that, overall, therapists may avoid using this treatment. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Symptom substitution 
A limitation of behavioural therapies, including fl ooding, is that they only mask symptoms and do not tackle the underlying causes of phobias (symptom substitution). For example, Jacqueline Persons (1986) reported the case of a woman with a phobia of death who was treated using fl ooding. Her fear of death declined, but her fear of being criticised got worse.  
However, the only evidence for symptom substitution comes in the form of case studies which, in this case, may only generalise to the phobias in the study (e.g. phobia of death may be diff erent from a phobia of heights). 
Consider: Is symptom substitution only a theoretical problem? 
desensitisation 
Questions 
1. 
What does the graph tell us about the effectiveness of different treatments for phobias in this study? (3 marks) 

2. 
Explain why a control condition is necessary. (2 marks) 

3. 
Studies comparing different therapies often use an independent groups design. Explain what an independent groups design is and why it is preferable for this type of study. (3 marks) 


 Case study: Manish 
Manish has a phobia of giant mole rats (zemmiphobia). This is a particular problem for him as he works in the mole rat enclosure at a zoo. Imagine you were helping Manish with this problem using systematic desensitisation. 
Questions 
1. 
How would you put together an anxiety hierarchy for treating zemmiphobia? 

2. 
How would you teach Manish relaxation? 

3. 
Explain how you would expose Manish to giant mole rats in such a way as to tackle his phobia. 


Check it 
1. 
Outline one behavioural method for treating phobias. [4 marks] 

2. 
Explain how ° ooding could be used to treat someone with a phobia of dogs. 


[2 marks] 
3. 
Explain one limitation of using systematic desensitisation to treat phobias. [4 marks] 

4. 
Describe and evaluate the behavioural approach to treating phobias. 


[12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 
 The behavioural approach to treating phobias // 149 
The cognitive approach to explaining depression 
The specification says… 
The cognitive approach to explaining depression: Beck’s negative triad and Ellis’s ABC model. 

Another approach to explaining the development of mental disorders is based on the cognitive approach. In particular we are interested in how depression involves negative patterns of thinking and other cognitive processes such as schema. 
Key terms 

Cognitive approach˜The term ‘cognitive’ has come to mean ‘mental processes’, so this approach is focused on how our mental processes (e.g. thoughts, perceptions, attention) a.ect behaviour. 
Negative triad˜Beck proposed that there are three kinds of negative thinking that contribute to becoming depressed: negative views of the world, the future and the self. Such negative views lead a person to interpret their experiences in a negative way and so make them more vulnerable to depression. 
ABC model˜Ellis proposed that depression occurs when an activating event (A) triggers an irrational belief (B) which in turn produces a consequence (C), 
i.e. an emotional response like depression. The key to this process is the irrational belief. 


The cognitive approach 
The cognitive approach to understanding depression emerged in the 1960s as psychologists in general changed their emphasis from studying observable behaviour to studying mental processes. The cognitive approach to depression is most concerned with explaining the kinds of thinking and selective attention that characterise depression. The approach does not ignore emotion and behaviour but it sees them as the result of cognition. 
Question 
Explain in what ways both Beck’s and Ellis’s explanations are examples of the cognitive approach. 






The cognitive approach to treating depression 
The specification says… 





a person’s happiness. Such dysfunctional thoughts lead to mental disorders such as depression. 

Condition  Client number  Number of sessions  Depression score before therapy  Depression score after therapy  
CBT  1  12  18  6  
2  12  22  10  
3  7  16  8  
4  5  17  10  
5  5  18  12  
Behaviour therapy  6  9  21  11  
7  9  16  7  
8  10  18  9  
9  6  18  11  
10  11  17  7  

Evaluation 
Evidence for effectiveness 
One strength of CBT is the large body of evidence supporting its eff ectiveness for treating depression. 
Many studies show that CBT works. For example, John March et al. (2007) compared CBT to antidepressant drugs and also to a combination of both treatments when treating 327 depressed adolescents. Aft er 36 weeks, 81% of the CBT group, 81% of the antidepressants group and 86% of the CBT plus antidepressants group were signifi cantly improved. So CBT was just as eff ective when used on its own and more so when used alongside antidepressants. CBT is usually a fairly brief therapy requiring six to 12 sessions so it is also cost-eff ective. 
This means that CBT is widely seen as the fi rst choice of treatment in public health care systems such as the National Health Service. 
Suitability for diverse clients 
One limitation of CBT for depression is the lack of eff ectiveness for severe cases and for clients with learning disabilities. 
In some cases depression can be so severe that clients cannot motivate themselves to engage with the cognitive work of CBT. They may not even be able to pay attention to what is happening in a session. It also seems likely that the complex rational thinking involved in CBT makes it unsuitable for treating depression in clients with learning disabilities. Peter Sturmey (2005) suggests that, in general, any form of psychotherapy (i.e. any ‘talking’ therapy) is not suitable for people with learning disabilities, and this includes CBT. 
This suggests that CBT may only be appropriate for a specifi c range of people with depression. 
Counterpoint Although the conventional wisdom has been that CBT is 
unsuitable for very depressed people and for clients with learning disabilities, 
there is now some more recent evidence that challenges this. A review by 
Gemma Lewis and Glyn Lewis (2016) concluded that CBT was as eff ective as 
antidepressant drugs and behavioural therapies for severe depression. Another 
review by John Taylor et al. (2008) concluded that, when used appropriately, CBT 
is eff ective for people with learning disabilities. 
This means that CBT may be suitable for a wider range of people than was 
once thought. 
Relapse rates 
A further limitation of CBT for the treatment of depression is its high relapse rates. 
Although CBT is quite eff ective in tackling the symptoms of depression, there are some concerns over how long the benefi ts last. Relatively few early studies of CBT for depression looked at long-term eff ectiveness. Some more recent studies suggest that long-term outcomes are not as good as had been assumed. For example in one study, Shehzad Ali et al. (2017) assessed depression in 439 clients every month for 12 months following a course of CBT. 42% of the clients relapsed into depression within six months of ending treatment and 53% relapsed within a year. 
This means that CBT may need to be repeated periodically. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Client preference 
CBT for depression focuses on identifying and changing unhelpful patterns of thinking and behaviour. There is a large body of evidence to show that, when used with appropriate clients, this is highly eff ective, at least in the short term, in tackling symptoms of depression. 
However, not all clients want to tackle their depression this way. Some people just want their symptoms gone as quickly and easily as possible and prefer medication. Others, for example survivors of trauma, wish to explore the origins of their symptoms. In a study of client preference, Antoine Yrondi et al. (2015) found that depressed people rated CBT as their least preferred psychological therapy. 
Consider: Does it matter what depressed people want from a psychological therapy if it is effective? 
Some clients are too distressed to engage with CBT. 
 Treating Yasmin 
You have read about Yasmin’s experience of redundancy on the previous spread and her resulting depression. We are now going to look at Ellis’s ideas about challenging irrational beliefs to show how a cognitive behaviour therapist might be able to help Yasmin. 
Questions 
1. 
Yasmin experiences irrational thoughts. Explain how these are irrational. 

2. 
How might you go about challenging these thoughts if you were a cognitive behaviour therapist? 


 Trina 
Depression is a common but very debilitating condition. The ‘ÿ rst line’ treatment in the National Health Service is CBT. 
Trina has been diagnosed with depression. Her symptoms include sadness and lethargy – she struggles to get out of bed each morning – and she is disturbed by automatic thoughts that she is a failure and her future is going to be unhappy. 
Questions 
1. 
How might a cognitive behaviour therapist tackle Trina’s depression? 

2. 
Trina asks her therapist how useful CBT is. What might the therapist tell her? 


Check it 
1. 
Outline cognitive behaviour therapy as a treatment for depression. [4 marks] 

2. 
Explain one strength of cognitive behaviour therapy as a treatment for depression. [4 marks] 

3. 
Outline how a therapist may encourage a client to challenge irrational thoughts when treating depression. [4 marks] 

4. 
Discuss the cognitive approach to treating depression. [12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 


 The cognitive approach to treating depression // 153 
The biological approach to explaining OCD 
The specification says… 
The biological approach to explaining OCD: 
genetic and neural explanations. 
We now turn to the third mental disorder in the specif cation, OCD, and consider explanations for it. In particular we are interested in how an individual’s vulnerability to OCD may be a. ected by their genetic make-up and how the brain functioning of someone with OCD may di. er from that of someone without the condition. 
Key terms 
Biological approach˜A perspective that emphasises the importance of physical processes in the body such as genetic inheritance and neural function. 
Genetic explanations˜Genes make up chromosomes and consist of DNA which codes the physical features of an organism (such as eye colour, height) and psychological features (such as mental disorder, intelligence). Genes are transmitted from parents to o. spring, i.e. inherited. 
Neural explanations˜The view that physical and psychological characteristics are determined by the behaviour of the nervous system, in particular the brain as well as individual neurons. 
Jack 
OCD is widely believed to be a biological condition with its roots in genetic vulnerability and brain dysfunction. 
Jack has OCD. His grandfather and uncle also had OCD, to the extent that his uncle had brain surgery to relieve his symptoms. As a psychology student Jack is curious about what might have caused his condition. 
Questions 
1. 
How likely is it that a genetic vulnerability has caused Jack’s OCD? 

2. 
How might Jack’s symptoms be linked to activity in his brain? 


Underview of the brain showing regions implicated in OCD. 
Parahippocampal gyrus 
Lateral frontal lobes 
Genetic explanations 
Some mental disorders appear to have a stronger biological component than others, and OCD is a good example of a condition that may be largely understood as biological in nature. One form of biological explanation is the genetic explanation. 
Genes are involved in individual vulnerability to OCD. In a classic study, Aubrey Lewis (1936) observed that of his OCD patients, 37% had parents with OCD and 21% had siblings with OCD. This suggests that OCD runs in families, although what is probably passed on from one generation to the next is genetic vulnerability not the certainty of OCD. According to the diathesis-stress model certain genes leave some people more likely to develop a mental disorder but it is not certain. Some environmental stress (experience) is necessary to trigger the condition. 
Candidate genes 
Researchers have identifi ed genes, which create vulnerability for OCD, called candidate genes. Some of these genes are involved in regulating the development of the serotonin system. For example, the gene 5HT1-D beta is implicated in the transport of serotonin across synapses. 
OCD is polygenic 
However, like many conditions, OCD seems to be polygenic. This means that OCD is not caused by one single gene but by a combination of genetic variations that together signifi cantly increase vulnerability. 
Steven Taylor (2013) has analysed fi ndings of previous studies and found evidence that up to 230 diff erent genes may be involved in OCD. Genes that have been studied in relation to OCD include those associated with the action of dopamine as well as serotonin, both neurotransmitters believed to have a role in regulating mood. 
Different types of OCD 
One group of genes may cause OCD in one person but a diff erent group of genes may cause the disorder in another person. The term used to describe this is aetiologically heterogeneous, meaning that the origins (aetiology) of OCD vary from one person to another (heterogeneous). 
There is also some evidence to suggest that diff erent types of OCD may be the result of particular genetic variations, such as hoarding disorder and religious obsession. 
Neural explanations 
The genes associated with OCD are likely to aff ect the levels of key neurotransmitters as well as structures of the brain. These are neural explanations. 
The role of serotonin 
One explanation for OCD concerns the role of the neurotransmitter serotonin, which is believed to help regulate mood. Neurotransmitters are responsible for relaying information from one neuron to another. If a person has low levels of serotonin then normal transmission of mood-relevant information does not take place and a person may experience low moods (and other mental processes may also be aff ected). At least some cases of OCD may be explained by a reduction in the functioning of the serotonin system in the brain. 
Decision-making systems 
Some cases of OCD, and in particular hoarding disorder, seem to be associated with impaired decision-making. This in turn may be associated with abnormal functioning of the lateral (side bits) of the frontal lobes of the brain. The frontal lobes are the front part of the brain (behind your forehead) that are responsible for logical thinking and making decisions. 
There is also evidence to suggest that an area called the left  parahippocampal gyrus (see diagram on left ), associated with processing unpleasant emotions, functions abnormally in OCD. 
All the main approaches in psychology are discussed in Chapter 4. The biological approach is on pages 114–119. Psychology grew out of biology, and the study of mental disorder developed largely within the medical profession, so it is no surprise that there are important biological approaches to explaining mental health issues. 
154 //  Chapter 5 Psychopathology 

The biological approach to treating OCD 

Evaluation 
Evidence of effectiveness 
One strength of drug treatment for OCD is good evidence for its eff ectiveness. 
There is clear evidence to show that SSRIs reduce symptom severity and improve the quality of life for people with OCD. For example, G. Mustafa Soomro et al. (2009) reviewed 17 studies that compared SSRIs to placebos in the treatment of OCD. All 17 studies showed signifi cantly better outcomes for SSRIs than for the placebo conditions. Typically symptoms reduce for around 70% of people taking SSRIs. For the remaining 30%, most can be helped by either alternative drugs or combinations of drugs and psychological therapies. 
This means that drugs appear to be helpful for most people with OCD. 
Counterpoint There is some evidence to suggest that even if drug treatments 
are helpful for most people with OCD they may not be the most eff ective treatments 
available. Petros Skapinakis et al. (2016) carried out a systematic review of outcome 
studies and concluded that both cognitive and behavioural (exposure) therapies were 
more eff ective than SSRIs in the treatment of OCD. 
This means that drugs may not be the optimum treatment for OCD. 
Cost-effective and non-disruptive 
One further strength of drugs is that they are cost-eff ective and non-disruptive to people’s lives. 
A strength of drug treatments for psychological disorders in general is that they are cheap compared to psychological treatments because many thousands of tablets or liquid doses can be manufactured in the time it takes to conduct one session of a psychological therapy. Using drugs to treat OCD is therefore good value for public health systems like the NHS and represents a good use of limited funds. As compared to psychological therapies, SSRIs are also non-disruptive to people’s lives. If you wish you can simply take drugs until your symptoms decline. This is quite diff erent from psychological therapy which involves time spent attending therapy sessions. 
This means that drugs are popular with many people with OCD and their doctors. 
Serious side-effects 
One limitation of drug treatments for OCD is that drugs can have potentially serious side-eff ects. 
Although drugs such as SSRIs help most people, a small minority will get no benefi t. Some people also experience side-eff ects such as indigestion, blurred vision and loss of sex drive. These side-eff ects are usually temporary, however they can be quite distressing for people and for a minority they are long-lasting. For those taking the tricyclic clomipramine, side-eff ects are more common and can be more serious. For example more than 1 in 10 people experience erection problems and weight gain, 1 in 100 become aggressive and experience heart-related problems. 
This means that some people have a reduced quality of life as a result of taking drugs and may stop taking them altogether, meaning the drugs cease to be eff ective. 
Evaluation eXtra 
Biased evidence 
There is always some controversy over the evidence for the eff ectiveness of drugs. Some psychologists believe that the evidence for drug eff ectiveness is biased because researchers are sponsored by drug companies and may selectively publish positive outcomes for the drugs their sponsors are selling (Goldacre 2013). 
On the other hand, there is a lack of independent studies of drug eff ectiveness and also research on psychological therapies may be biased. The best evidence available is supportive of the usefulness of drugs for OCD. 
Consider: Should we trust the evidence for the effectiveness of drugs? 
Study tip 
This is one of the most technically complex parts of the specif cation because there are a lot of long and unfamiliar words to get your head around. Use the initials like SSRIs and SNRIs to make it simpler. Don’t get bogged down in detail or anxious that you can’t imagine serotonin crossing a synapse! That’s normal. 
Drug therapies are relatively cheap compared with the cost of psychological therapy. They are also easy – people don’t have to make much effort, they just have to remember to take the drugs. 
Olanzapine 
SSRIs signiÿ cantly reduce symptoms in around 70% of patients (Sansone and Sansone 2011). This means that alternative treatments are needed for the remaining 30%. 
Filippo Bogetto et al. (2000) trialled a drug called olanzapine with 23 people with OCD who had not responded to SSRIs. Ten of these people responded to olanzapine. The mean symptom rating improved from 26.8 to 18.9 on the Yale Brown Obsessive Compulsion Scale. 
Questions 
1. 
State the aim of the study. (2 marks) 

2. 
Write a non-directional hypothesis for this study. (2 marks) 

3. 
Brie° y explain one ethical issue the researchers should take into account when carrying out the study, and explain how they could deal with this. (2 marks + 2 marks) 


Akash 
SSRIs are the ÿ rst-line treatment for OCD. They may be taken alone or with a psychological therapy. It may be possible in some cases to just have the psychological therapy. 
Akash is a busy entrepreneur with a young family. He has a recent diagnosis of OCD and his doctor prescribes drug treatment – . uoxetine. Akash has always been healthy and never thought much about taking drugs for a psychological disorder. He enquires about the possibility of having a psychological treatment instead. 
Questions 
1. 
Given Akash’s lifestyle can you see any reasons why . uoxetine might suit him better than psychological treatment? 

2. 
How else might Akash’s doctor advise him to relieve his symptoms of OCD? 


Check it 
1. Outline the use of drug therapy to treat OCD. 
[4 marks] 
2. 
Explain one limitation and one strength of using drug therapies to treat OCD. [6 marks] 

3. 
Describe and evaluate the biological approach to the treatment of OCD. 


[12 marks AS, 16 marks AL] 
 The biological approach to treating OCD // 157 
Practical corner 
The specification says… 
Knowledge and understanding of … research methods, practical research skills and maths skills. These should be developed through … ethical practical research activities. 

This means that you should conduct practical investigations wherever possible. Because you cannot carry out research on participants with mental health problems you are limited here to research using a non clinical population (a quasi experiment looking at gender di.erences) or making observations of existing data. 
Ethics check 
Ethics are discussed in detail on pages 178 179. We strongly suggest that you complete this checklist before collecting data. 
1. 
Do participants know participation is voluntary? 

2. 
Do participants know what to expect? 

3. 
Do participants know they can withdraw at any time? 

4. 
Are individuals’ results anonymous? 

5. 
Have I minimised the risk of distress to participants? 

6. 
Have I avoided asking sensitive questions? 

7. 
Will I avoid bringing my school/teacher/psychology into disrepute? 

8. 
Have I considered all other ethical issues? 

9. 
Has my teacher approved this? 


Remember not to frighten or upset your participants! 
Table 1 People who have an irrational fear. 
Gender  Men (N = 10)  Women (N = 10)  
Irrational fear  4  7  

Table 2 Severity of fear. 



1. 
In Table 1, N = 10. What does this mean? (1 mark) 

2. 
What percentages of men and women reported an irrational fear? (1 mark) 

3. 
What conclusion would you reach based on the information in Table 1? (2°marks) 

4. 
Using the data in Table 2, calculate the median severity scores for men and women and present them in a suitable table. (2 marks) 

5. 
Identify the range of scores for men and women. (1 mark) 

6. 
What do these ranges tell us about the fears of the two groups of participants? (2 marks) 


158 //  Chapter 5 Psychopathology 



The maths bit 2 
1. Construct a bar chart from the data in the table below. (3 marks) 
2. 
Outline the conclusions you might draw from this bar chart. (2 marks) 

3. 
Is the data in the table quantitative or qualitative? (1 mark) 

4. 
Explain one strength and one limitation of using this kind of data. (2 marks + 2 marks) 

5. 
Given that this is an observational study, suggest what sampling method could be used to collect data in this study. Explain your answers. (2 marks) 


 Practical corner // 159 
Revision summaries 


How do we decide when someone needs treatment for a mental disorder? 


Defi nition 
Numerically unusual behaviour or characteristic. 
Example: intellectual disability disorder 
IQ below 70 (bottom 2%) is part of the diagnosis of IDD. 
Evaluation 
Real-world application 
Useful in diagnosis (e.g. IDD) and assessment (e.g. BDI for depression). 
Unusual characteristics can be positive 
Some unusual characteristics would not be judged abnormal e.g. high IQ. 
Evaluation extra: Benefits versus problems 
Some people with low IQ function adequately and don’t benefit from being labelled (social stigma). 
Defi nition 
Social judgements about what is acceptable. 
Norms are culture-specific 
What is thought normal in one culture may not be in another (e.g. homosexuality). 
Example: antisocial personality disorder 
Impulsive, aggressive, irresponsible behaviour is not socially acceptable in many cultures. 
Evaluation 
Real-world application 
Used to diagnose some disorders e.g. antisocial and schizotypal personality disorder. 
Cultural and situational relativism 
Different standards, therefore hard to make social judgements (e.g. hearing voices). 
Evaluation extra: Human rights abuses 
Social norm approach maintains control over minority groups, e.g. women (nymphomania) and slaves (drapetomania), but useful e.g. for antisocial personality disorder. 
Defi nition 
Inability to cope with demands of everyday life. 
When is someone failing? 
Rosenhan and Seligman listed signs e.g. non-conformity to social rules, personal distress, severe distress or danger to self or others. 
Example: intellectual disability disorder 
Failing to function is part of the diagnosis of IDD as well as low IQ. 
Evaluation 
Represents a threshold for help 
Provides a way to identify when someone needs professional help. 
Discrimination and social control 
May lead to people living non-standard lifestyles being judged as abnormal. 
Evaluation extra: Failure to function may not be abnormal 
Most of us experience such failure e.g. bereavement, but still may require help. 


An anxiety disorder. 
Deviation from ideal mental health 
Defi nition 
Jahoda considered normality rather than abnormality. 
What does ideal mental health look like? 
Includes lack of symptoms, rationality, self-actualisation, coping with stress, realistic world-view. 
Evaluation 
A comprehensive definition 
Includes most of the reasons anyone might seek help. 
May be culture-bound 
Some ideas e.g. self-actualisation are specific to US/European cultures, and independence varies within European cultures (e.g. Germany versus Italy). 
Evaluation extra: Extremely high standards 
Few people ever meet them, but useful as a goal for mental health. 


Characteristics 
Behavioural 
Panic – scream or run away. 
Avoidance – conscious 
effort to avoid. 
Endurance – may stay and 
bear it. 
Emotional 
Anxiety – unpleasant state of high arousal, disproportionate to threat. 
Fear – short-lasting, more 
intense. 
Emotional response 
is unreasonable/ 
disproportionate to threat. 
Cognitive 
Selective attention – can’t 
look away. 
Irrational beliefs – 
unfounded beliefs. 
Cognitive distortions – unrealistic. 
Behavioural explanation 
Two-process model 
Two processes of conditioning (Mowrer). 
Acquisition by classical conditioning 
UCS linked to NS, then both produce UCR (fear), now called the CR. 
E.g. Little Albert played with rat (NS), heard loud noise (UCS), then rat (now CS) produces fear response (now CR). 
Maintenance by operant conditioning 
Avoidance of phobic stimulus negatively reinforced by anxiety reduction, so the phobia is maintained. 
Evaluation 
Real-world application 
Phobias successfully treated by preventing avoidance, as suggested by the model. 
Cognitive aspects of phobias 
Fails to account for cognitive aspects of phobias, e.g. irrational fears. 
Phobias and traumatic experiences 
73% of people with a dental phobia had past trauma, in control group with no phobia only 21% had trauma (De Jongh et al.) 
Counterpoint – not all cases of phobias follow bad experiences and vice versa. 
Evaluation extra: Learning and evolution 
Two-process model explains individual phobias, but evolutionary approach explains general aspects of phobias. 
Systematic desensitisation (SD) 
Anxiety hierarchy 
A list of situations ranked for how much anxiety they produce. 
Relaxation 
Reciprocal inhibition – relaxation and anxiety 
can’t happen at the same time. Relaxation includes imagery and/or breathing techniques. 
Exposure 
Exposed to phobic stimulus whilst relaxed at each level of the anxiety hierarchy. 
Evaluation 
Evidence of e.ectiveness 
More effective than relaxation alone after 33 months (Gilroy et al.) and effective for a range of phobias (Wechsler et al.). 
People with learning disabilities 
SD best – cognitive therapy requires complex rational thought, flooding is traumatic. 
Evaluation extra: SD in virtual reality 
Avoids dangerous situations and cost-effective, but lacks realism (Wechsler et al.). 
Flooding 
What is it? 
Exposes clients to a very frightening situation without a build-up. 
How does it work? 
Works by extinction of the conditioned fear response. 
Ethical safeguards 
Clients must give informed consent and be prepared for flooding. 
Evaluation 
Cost-e.ective 
Clinically effective and not expensive, may take only 1–3 sessions. 
Traumatic 
Rated as more stressful than SD (Schumacher et al.), lack of informed consent and higher attrition rates. 
Evaluation extra: Symptom substitution 
Occurs if cause of phobia is not tackled e.g. women with death phobia (Persons), but only evidence is from case studies, may not generalise. 

 Revision summaries // 161 
Practice questions, answers and feedback 

 Practice questions, answers and feedback // 163 

Definitions of abnormality (1) 
1. Which of the following is statistically abnormal? 
(a) 
An IQ of 45. 

(b) 
An IQ of 71. 

(c) 
An IQ of 120. 

(d) 
An IQ of 100. 


2. What is the main reason why someone with antisocial personality disorder would be judged abnormal? 
(a) 
They are very unusual people. 

(b) 
Their behaviour deviates from social norms. 

(c) 
They can’t function effectively. 

(d) 
They don’t display ideal mental health. 


3. Which of these is a strength/limitation of statistical infrequency? 
(a) 
It has no real-world application in diagnosis and assessment. 

(b) 
All unusual characteristics are a bad thing. 

(c) 
Unusual people need a diagnosis to help them become more normal. 

(d) 
Unusual positive characteristics are just as uncommon as unusual negative characteristics. 


4. Which is the best definition of ‘cultural relativism’? 
(a) 
Social norms vary between different cultures. 

(b) 
Mental health is more common in some cultures. 

(c) 
Social norms are only useful in some cultures. 

(d) 
Relationships between relatives is the same in all cultures. 



Definitions of abnormality (2) 
1. According to Rosenhan and Seligman which of these is a sign of failing to cope? 
(a) 
A person no longer conforms to social rules. 

(b) 
A person hears voices. 

(c) 
A person experiences mild distress. 

(d) 
A person’s behaviour is unusual. 


2. According to Jahoda’s ideal mental health criteria, which of the following is a sign of ideal mental health? 
(a) 
Failure to cope with stress. 

(b) 
Good self-esteem. 

(c) 
Being dependent on other people. 

(d) 
Conforming to social norms. 


3. Which of these people is failing to function adequately? 
(a) 
Someone who cannot hold down a job. 

(b) 
Someone with an alternative lifestyle. 

(c) 
Someone who has a fairly happy relationship. 

(d) 
Someone with a smallish house. 


4. Which of these is a strength of deviation from ideal mental health? 
(a) 
It is usefully narrow. 

(b) 
It applies well to a variety of cultures. 

(c) 
It is comprehensive. 

(d) 
It sets a realistic standard for mental health. 



Phobias 
1. Which of these is a behavioural characteristic of phobias? 
(a) 
Fear. 

(b) 
Avoidance. 

(c) 
Anxiety. 

(d) 
Aggression. 


2. Which of these is an emotional characteristic of phobias? 
(a) 
Fear. 

(b) 
Sadness. 

(c) 
Anger. 

(d) 
Humour. 


3. Which of these is a cognitive characteristic of phobias? 
(a) 
Selective attention. 

(b) 
Delusions. 

(c) 
Avoidance. 

(d) 
Endurance. 


4. What is the difference between fear and anxiety? 
(a) 
Fear is cognitive, anxiety is emotional. 

(b) 
Fear is emotional, anxiety is cognitive. 

(c) 
Fear is immediate and anxiety is long term. 

(d) 
Fear is long term and anxiety is immediate. 



Depression 
1. People with depression may experience which of the following behavioural characteristics? 
(a) 
Changes to activity level. 

(b) 
Changes to sleep patterns. 

(c) 
Changes to eating patterns. 

(d) 
All of the above. 


2. People with a diagnosis of depression are likely to have: 
(a) 
Lowered mood. 

(b) 
Anger. 

(c) 
Low self-esteem. 

(d) 
All of the above. 


3. Which of the following is a cognitive characteristic of depression? 
(a) 
Focusing on the negative aspects of a situation. 

(b) 
Low self-esteem. 

(c) 
Anger. 

(d) 
All of the above. 


4. Absolutist thinking is also called: 
(a) 
Half-full, half-empty thinking. 

(b) 
Black-and-white thinking. 

(c) 
Self-harming thinking. 

(d) 
Psychomotor thinking. 


OCD 
1. Most people with OCD experience: 
(a) 
Obsessions only. 

(b) 
Compulsions only. 

(c) 
Obsessions and compulsions. 

(d) 
Obsessions or compulsions. 


2. Which of the following is not an emotional characteristic of OCD? 
(a) 
Anxiety. 

(b) 
Lowered mood. 

(c) 
Guilt. 

(d) 
Compulsions. 


3. People with a diagnosis of OCD are unlikely to experience which of these cognitions? 
(a) 
Obsessive thoughts. 

(b) 
Rational thoughts about their obsessive stimulus. 

(c) 
Cognitive coping strategies. 

(d) 
Good insight into their OCD. 


4. Maintaining constant alertness is called: 
(a) 
Catastrophic attention. 

(b) 
A behavioural characteristic. 

(c) 
Hypervigilance. 

(d) 
Paranoia. 


The behavioural approach to explaining phobias 
1. The two-process model of phobias involves: 
(a) 
Classical conditioning only. 

(b) 
Operant conditioning only. 

(c) 
Social learning only. 

(d) 
Classical and operant conditioning. 


2. A case study of learning a phobia by classical conditioning involved: 
(a) 
Little Peter. 

(b) 
Little Hans. 

(c) 
Little Albert. 

(d) 
Little Mix. 


3. Which is a limitation of the two-process model? 
(a) 
It can’t explain how phobias are maintained over time. 

(b) 
There is no supporting evidence. 

(c) 
It can’t explain how fear of dogs might be acquired. 

(d) 
It can’t explain preparedness for certain phobias. 


4. What reinforces avoidance in the two-process model? 
(a) 
Anxiety reduction. 

(b) 
Safety cues. 

(c) 
Preparedness. 

(d) 
Positive reinforcement. 



The behavioural approach to treating phobias 
1. Which of the following is not normally part of systematic desensitisation? 
(a) 
Learning relaxation procedures. 

(b) 
Constructing an anxiety hierarchy. 

(c) 
Massive immediate exposure to the phobic stimulus. 

(d) 
Gradually increasing exposure to the phobic stimulus. 


’ 
’ 
’ ’ 
’ 
MCQ answers 
Defi nitions of abnormality (1) 1A, 2B, 3D, 4A Defi nitions of abnormality (2) 1A, 2B, 3A, 4C Phobias 1B, 2A, 3A, 4C Depression 1D, 2D, 3A, 4B OCD 1C, 2D, 3B, 4C The behavioural approach to explaining phobias 1D, 2C, 3D, 4A The behavioural approach to treating phobias 1C, 2B, 3D, 4C The cognitive approach to explaining depression 1C, 2B, 3C, 4D The cognitive approach to treating depression 1D, 2B, 3D, 4B The biological approach to explaining OCD 1D, 2C, 3C, 4D The biological approach to treating OCD 1B, 2C, 3D, 4A 
 Multiple-choice questions // 165 

Experimental method 
The specification says… 
Experimental method. 
Aims: stating aims, the difference between 
aims and hypotheses. 
Hypotheses: directional and non-directional. 
Variables: manipulation of variables 
including independent and dependent; 
operationalisation of variables. 

Psychologists are able to draw upon a number of 

Experimental method˜Involves the manipulation of an independent variable (IV) to measure the e.ect on the dependent variable (DV). Experiments may be laboratory, feld, natural or quasi. 
Aim˜A general statement of what the researcher intends to investigate, the purpose of the study. 
Hypothesis˜A clear, precise, testable statement that states the relationship between the variables to be investigated. Stated at the outset of any study. 
Directional hypothesis˜States the direction of the di.erence or relationship. 
Non-directional hypothesis˜Does not state the direction of the di.erence or relationship. 
Variables˜Any ‘thing’ that can vary or change within an investigation. Variables are generally used in experiments to determine if changes in one thing result in changes to another. 
Independent variable (IV) Some aspect of the experimental situation that is manipulated by the researcher – or changes naturally – so the e.ect on the DV can be measured. 
Dependent variable (DV) The variable that is measured by the researcher. Any e.ect on the DV should be caused by the change in the IV. 
Operationalisation˜Clearly defning variables in terms of how they can be measured. 

Writing clear and testable hypotheses is not easy. 
When you read your hypothesis back to yourself, make sure (1) the IV and DV are clear and measurable, (2) you have stated the relationship between the IV and DV and not stated an aim, (3) you have selected the appropriate hypothesis, i.e. directional or non-directional, based on the information you have been given in the question. 

Independent and dependent variables 
In an experiment, a researcher changes or manipulates the independent variable (IV) and records or measures the e˜ ect of this change on the dependent variable (DV). All other variables that might potentially a˜ ect the DV should remain constant in a properly run experiment. This is so the researcher can be conÿ dent that any change in the DV was due to the IV, and the IV alone. 
Levels of the IV 
In order to test the e˜ ect of the IV we need di˜ erent experimental conditions. If we simply gave some participants SpeedUpp, how would we know how talkative they were? We need a comparison. We could either: 
• 
Compare participants’ talkativeness before and a. er drinking SpeedUpp. 

• 
Compare two groups of participants – those who drink SpeedUpp with those who drink water (which is the way we have described the study on the facing page). 


In either case the two conditions are no SpeedUpp or drinking SpeedUpp. These are the two levels of the IV: the control condition (no SpeedUpp / drink of water) and the experimental condition (energy drink). 
A well-written hypothesis should make it easy to tell what the IV and DV are. May we proudly unveil the directional hypothesis we have written for our energy drink investigation comparing two groups of participants… 
The group that drinks an energy drink will be chattier than the group that 
drinks water. 
Note that this is di˜ erent from the hypothesis on the facing page – hypotheses come in all shapes and sizes but are still correct as long as they state the operationalised variables and the relationship between them. 
Operationalisation of variables 
So far, so good – except we have not yet managed to operationalise the variables in the hypothesis in order to make it testable. 
Many of the things that psychologists are interested in, such as social behaviour, intelligence or thinking, are o. en a little fuzzy and not easy to deÿ ne. Thus, in any study, one of the main tasks for the researcher is to ensure that the variables being investigated are as unfuzzy and measurable as possible. 
So, a much better hypothesis than the one above would be: 
A˜ er drinking 300 ml of SpeedUpp, participants say more words in the next 
ÿ ve minutes than participants who drink 300 ml of water. 
See the di˜ erence? Now that our variables are operationalised and our hypothesis is complete, we’re free to concentrate on more important things, such as how on earth we’re going to count all the words that twenty people say in ÿ ve minutes.  
Bringing it all together 
Questions 
For each of the aims of the investigations below, operationalise the IV and DV, and write a directional and non-directional hypothesis. (4 marks each) 
1. 
To investigate whether high conÿ dence levels in children affect their level of obedience. 

2. 
To investigate whether a new drug (Anxocalm) reduces anxiety in patients with phobias, as compared with having no treatment. 

3. 
To investigate whether yawning is contagious. 

4. 
To investigate whether owning a goldÿ sh has a positive effect on psychological well-being. 

5. 
To investigate whether grey-haired people have more fun than people with other hair colours. 


Are two tails better than one? Sometimes the terms ‘two-tailed’ and ‘one­tailed’ are used when describing a hypothesis instead of ‘non-directional’ and ‘directional’. (Though strictly speaking they are not the same – directional is not the same as ‘two-tailed’. A directional hypothesis requires a two-tailed test of signiÿ cance ... to be explained later ...) 
Directional or non-directional? 
Questions 
Decide whether the following hypotheses are directional or non-directional. What features/words in each hypothesis are important when making your choice? (2 marks each) 
1. 
There is a difference in children’s reading ability depending on whether they have blue or brown eyes. 

2. 
Dogs that are rewarded with treats sit when told to do so more often than dogs that are not rewarded with treats. 

3. 
There is a difference in the psychology grades of students depending on whether they are men or women. 

4. 
Teenagers who watch horror ÿ lms have more friends than teenagers who watch romantic comedies. 


IVs and DVs 
Questions 
Identify the IVs and DVs in the examples below. (2 marks each) 
1. 
Talking to a child will increase their language ability. 

2. 
People are more aggressive on hot days. 

3. 
Students may be late for school because they stayed up late the night before. 

4. 
Watching horror ÿ lms will make children have nightmares. 

5. 
People will be rated as more attractive if they wear red. 


Check it 
1. 
Explain the difference between an aim and a hypothesis. [2 marks] 

2. 
Identify one way in which each of the following terms could be operationalised: memory, physical aggression and intelligence. [3 marks] 

3. 
Suggest two reasons why a psychologist might choose to use a non-directional hypothesis. [2 marks] 


 Experimental method // 169 


Research issues 




Investigator effects 
Participant reactivity also leads to investigator e˜ ects. Consider this: it is possible that during our energy drink study, as we are recording the words spoken by each participant, we may be inclined to smile more during our interactions with some participants than others. Given that we are expecting the energy drink group to speak more than the water group, we may unknowingly – in our unconscious behaviour – encourage a greater level of chattiness from the energy drink participants. 
This is an example of an investigator eff ect, which refers to any unwanted infl uence of the investigator on the research outcome. As Hugh Coolican (2006) points out, this can include expectancy eff ects and unconscious cues (such as those described above). It might also refer to any actions of the researcher that were related to the study’s design, such as the selection of the participants, the materials, the instructions, etc. Leading questions, which are discussed in relation to eyewitness testimony on page 58, are a good example of the power of investigator eff ects. 
Randomisation 
In any investigation there are simple steps that a researcher can take to minimise the eff ect of extraneous/confounding variables on the outcome. One of these is randomisation, which refers to the use of chance methods to reduce the researcher’s unconscious biases when designing an investigation. In short, this is an attempt to control investigator eff ects. 
For example, a memory experiment may involve participants recalling words from a list. The order of the list should be randomly generated so that the position of each word is not decided by the researcher. 
In an experiment where participants are involved in a number of diff erent conditions, the order of these conditions should be randomly determined. For example, in the energy drink experiment we might want to know what quantity of SpeedUpp caused chattiness. We may set up four experimental conditions: drinking water (Condition A), drinking 100 ml of SpeedUpp (Condition B), drinking 200 ml of SpeedUpp (Condition C), and drinking 300 ml of SpeedUpp (Condition D). 
If all participants were to take part in all four conditions, the order in which these conditions were completed would need to be randomised for each participant (this is an alternative to counterbalancing – discussed on the next spread). 
Standardisation 
As far as is possible within an investigation, all participants should be subject to the same environment, information and experience. To ensure this, all procedures are standardised, in other words there is a list of exactly what will be done in the study. This includes standardised instructions that are read to each participant. Such standardisation means that non­standardised changes in procedure do not act as extraneous variables. 
Maths test 
A teacher wanted to see how the investigator effect would in° uence performance on a maths test. She gave 20 of her sixth form class the same maths test but told half of the class the test was suitable for year 10 students and the other half that it was suitable for degree students. When the results of the test were analysed, the group that were told it was suitable for year 10s had performed signiÿ cantly better on average. 
Questions 
1. 
Identify the IV and the DV within this experiment. (2 marks) 

2. 
Identify one possible extraneous variable in this experiment and brie° y explain how it may have affected the DV. (3 marks) 

3. 
Explain how the results of this experiment could be used to support the investigator effect. (3 marks) 


The Variable family 
Ivy (IV) and Davy (DV) are a happy couple with a good relationship. However, Civy (CV) is often interfering and tries to constantly change Davy much to Ivy’s annoyance… 
Study tip 
Be careful not to refer to ALL investigations as experiments. This is something that students new to psychology tend to do quite often. 
If you are not sure whether the piece of research you are talking about involved an experiment then you should use a more general term such as ‘investigation’ or ‘study’. 
Note that in research methods, some of the terms and concepts we discuss relate to experiments specif cally, but others are also a feature of investigations in general. 
Participant variables and situational variables 
Extraneous variables can be subdivided into participant variables and situational variables. Participant variables are any individual differences between participants that may affect the DV. Situational variables are any features of the experimental situation that may affect the DV. 
Question 
Decide which of the variables below are participant variables and which are situational variables. (4 marks) 
Noise  Age   Motivation  Weather  
Personality  Temperature Intelligence  Concentration  
Time of day  Gender  Instructions 

Check it 
1. 
Outline what is meant by ‘demand characteristics’. [2 marks] 

2. 
Explain the difference between an extraneous variable and a confounding variable. [2 marks] 

3. 
Suggest one example of how randomisation could be used within psychological research. [2˜marks] 

4. 
Outline what is meant by ‘investigator effects’ and explain why it is important to control for these when conducting research.  [4 marks] 


 Research issues // 171 
Experimental designs 
The specification says… 
Experimental designs: repeated measures, 
independent groups, matched pairs. 
Control: random allocation and counterbalancing. 
In order to f nd out whether the independent variable 
(IV) a. ects the dependent variable (DV), we need something to compare it with – a comparison condition – a di. erent level of the IV. 
This leads us to three types of experimental design, each with di. erent strengths and limitations. 
Key terms 
Experimental design˜The di. erent ways in which participants can be organised in relation to the experimental conditions. 
Independent groups design˜Participants are allocated to di. erent groups where each group represents one experimental condition. 
Repeated measures˜All participants take part in all conditions of the experiment. 
Matched pairs design˜Pairs of participants are f rst matched on some variable(s) that may a. ect the dependent variable. Then one member of the pair is assigned to Condition A and the other to Condition B. 
Random allocation˜An attempt to control for participant variables in an independent groups design which ensures that each participant has the same chance of being in one condition as any other. 
Counterbalancing˜An attempt to control for the e. ects of order in a repeated measures design: half the participants experience the conditions in one order, and the other half in the opposite order. 
Study tip 
Don’t confuse experimental ‘designs’ with ‘types’ of experiment (as in lab, f eld, natural and quasi – covered on the next spread). It’s easily done so make sure you’re aware of the di. erence! 
Experimental designs 
Experimental design refers to the way in which participants are used in experiments. By ‘used’ we do not mean taking them out for dinner and never calling them again, we mean how participants are arranged in relation to the diff erent experimental conditions. 
Independent groups 
An independent groups design is when two separate groups of participants experience two diff erent conditions of the experiment. If there are two levels of the independent variable (IV) this means that all participants experience one level of the IV only. In our SpeedUpp energy drink investigation this would involve: 
• 
One group of participants (group 1) drinking the energy drink (let’s call this condition A, the experimental condition). 

• 
A diff erent group of participants (group 2) drinking the water (let’s call this condition B, the control condition). 


The performance of the two groups would then be compared. In this case, we would compare the diff erence in the mean number of words spoken in the fi ve-minute period aft er drinking for each group/condition. 
Repeated measures 
Another way of carrying out the energy drink investigation would be to use a repeated measures design – all participants experience both conditions of the experiment. 
• 
Each participant would fi rst, for example, experience condition A (the energy drink condition, the experimental condition). 

• 
Each participant would then later be tested again in condition B (the glass of water condition, the control condition). 


Following this, the two mean scores from both conditions would be compared to see if there was a diff erence. 
Matched pairs 
In a matched pairs design, participants are paired together on a variable or variables relevant to the experiment. For instance, in a memory study participants might be matched on their IQ, as this might be a good indicator of their ability to recall information. The two participants with the fi rst and second highest IQ scores would be paired together, as would the participants with the third and fourth highest, and so on. Then one participant from each pair would be allocated to a diff erent condition of the experiment. This is an attempt to control for the confounding variable of participant variables and oft en necessitates the use of a pre-test if matching is to be eff ective. 
So back to our SpeedUpp study, we might observe participants interacting in a room before the experiment begins and select the two people that appear to be the chattiest. One of the pair would be placed in condition A and the other in condition B. We would then do the same with the third and fourth most talkative participants, and so on. The experiment would then be run in the same way as an independent groups design (see above). 
Condition A Condition B Condition A Condition B 
In an independent groups design (left) the participants in each condition are different…but they are the same in a repeated measures design (right). 
Evaluation 
Independent groups 
The biggest issue with an independent groups design is that the participants who occupy the diff erent groups are not the same in terms of participant variables. If a researcher fi nds a mean diff erence between the groups on the dependent variable (DV) this may be more to do with participant variables than the eff ects of the IV. These diff erences may act as a confounding variable, reducing the validity of the fi ndings. To deal with this problem researchers use random allocation (see right). 
Independent groups designs are less economical than repeated measures as each participant contributes a single result only. Twice as many participants would be needed to produce equivalent data to that collected in a repeated measures design. This increases the time/money spent on recruiting participants. 
The strengths of using independent groups are that order e. ects are not a problem whereas they are a problem for repeated measures designs. Participants also are less likely to guess the aims. 
Repeated measures 
The biggest issue for repeated measures is that each participant has to do at least two tasks and the order of these tasks may be signifi cant (i.e. there are order eff ects). In the energy drink example, having the energy drink fi rst may have a continuing eff ect when a participant drinks water aft erwards. To deal with this, researchers use counterbalancing (see right). 
Order eff ects also arise because repeating two tasks could create boredom or fatigue that might cause deterioration in performance on the second task, so it matters what order the tasks are in. Alternatively, participants’ performance may improve through the eff ects of practice, especially on a skill-based task – in this case participants would perform better on the second task. Order acts as a confounding variable. 
It is also more likely that participants will work out the aim of the study when they experience all conditions of the experiment. For this reason, demand characteristics tend to be more of a feature of repeated measures designs than independent groups. 
The strengths of using repeated measures are that participant variables are controlled (therefore higher validity) and fewer participants are needed (therefore less time spent recruiting them). 
Matched pairs 
Participants only take part in a single condition so order eff ects and demand characteristics are less of a problem. 
Although there is some attempt to reduce participant variables in this design, participants can never be matched exactly. Even when identical twins are used as matched pairs, there will still be important diff erences between them that may aff ect the DV. 
Matching may be time-consuming and expensive, particularly if a pre-test is required, so this is less economical than other designs. 
Which design? 
Questions 
Which of the following is an independent groups design, a repeated measures design or a matched pairs design? (1 mark each) 
1. 
Depressed participants were assigned to receive either cognitive therapy or behaviour therapy for a 12-week period. A standardised test for depression was administered and participants were paired on the severity of their symptoms. 

2. 
A researcher randomly assigned student volunteers to two conditions. Those in condition 1 attempted to recall a list of words that were organised into meaningful categories; those in condition 2 attempted to recall the same words, randomly grouped on the page. 

3. 
To investigate whether students are more alert in the morning or the afternoon, each student is given a hazard perception test before school and at the end of the day. 


Random allocation 
To address the problem of participant variables in an independent groups design, participants should be randomly allocated to the different experimental conditions. Random allocation attempts to evenly distribute participant characteristics across the conditions of the experiment using random techniques – for example pieces of paper with A or B written on them are placed in a ‘hat’ and the researcher selects them one at a time to assign participants to groups. 
Question 
Explain one way in which we could have randomly allocated participants to the two conditions in the energy drink study. (3 marks) 
Counterbalancing 
Counterbalancing is an attempt to control order effects in a repeated measures design. In counterbalancing, half the participants take part in condition A then B, and the other half take part in condition B then A as follows: 
Participant 1            A–B                    Participant 2            B–A Participant 3            A–B and so on. 
Counterbalancing is sometimes referred to as the ABBA technique for obvious reasons i.e. where every participant does four trials, A, B, B then A. 
Note (as with random allocation in relation to participant variables), counterbalancing does not remove or prevent the problem, but attempts to balance out the effects. 
Question 
Explain how, if we had used a repeated measures design in the energy drink study, we could have counterbalanced the two conditions. (3 marks) 
Rat-man 
Look at the Bugelski and Alampay rat-man study on page 113. Explain why a repeated measures design would not have been suitable for this investigation. (2 marks) 
It’s a little known fact that the Swedish pop group ABBA took their name from a way of reducing order effects in a repeated measures design experiment. 
Check it 
1. 
Outline what is meant by ‘random allocation’ and outline one way in which this could be carried out. [3 marks] 

2. 
Explain one limitation of a repeated measures design. [3 marks] 

3. 
Outline what is meant by a ‘matched pairs design’.  [2 marks]


 Experimental designs // 173 

Types of experiment 
The specification says… 
Types of experiment, laboratory and field experiments; natural and quasi-experiments. 


All experiments involve a change in an independent variable, with the researcher recording or measuring the subsequent e.ects on the dependent variable. 
How the IV changes, and under what circumstances, varies from one type of experiment to another. There are four di.erent types of experiment used in psychology, each with its own strengths and limitations. 
Key terms 

Laboratory (lab) experiment˜An experiment that takes place in a controlled environment within which the researcher manipulates the IV and records the e.ect on the DV, whilst maintaining strict control of extraneous variables. 
Field experiment˜An experiment that takes place in a natural setting within which the researcher manipulates the IV and records the e.ect on the DV. 
Natural experiment˜An experiment where the change in the IV is not brought about by the researcher but would have happened even if the researcher had not been there. 



Good enough to eat? 
If a researcher had deprived you of food for four hours you might perceive this cake as being brighter than if you had just eaten, but would you have been involved in a lab, field, natural or quasi experiment? 
174 //  Chapter 6 Research methods 
Natural experiments 
Natural experiments are like a lab or fi eld experiment insofar as the researcher measures the eff ect of an IV on a DV. However, what distinguishes a natural experiment is the researcher has no control over the IV and cannot change it – someone or something else causes the IV to vary. For example, before and aft er a natural disaster or whether a child is in hospital at age 5 or 10. 
Note that it is the IV that is natural, not necessarily the setting – participants may be tested in a lab. The DV may also be naturally occurring (e.g. exam results) or may be devised by the experimenter and then measured in the fi eld or a lab. 
Strengths 
Natural experiments provide opportunities for research that may not otherwise be undertaken for practical or ethical reasons, such as the studies of institutionalised Romanian orphans (Rutter  et al., see page 92). 
Natural experiments oft en have high external validity because they involve the study of real-world issues and problems as they happen, such as the eff ects of a natural disaster on stress levels. 
Limitations 
A naturally occurring event may only happen very rarely, reducing the opportunities for research. This also may limit the scope for generalising fi ndings to other similar situations. 
Another issue is that participants may not be randomly allocated to experimental conditions (note that this only applies when there is an independent groups design). This means the researcher might be less sure whether the IV aff ected the DV. For example, in the study of Romanian orphans, the IV was whether children were adopted early or late. However, there were lots of other diff erences between these groups, such as those who were adopted late may also have been less sociable than some of the other children which may have made them less appealing for prospective parents. 
Such research may be conducted in a lab and therefore may lack realism and demand characteristics may be an issue. 
Quasi-experiments 
Quasi-experiments have an IV that is based on an existing diff erence between people (for instance, age or gender). No one has manipulated this variable, it simply exists and, unlike in a natural experiment, the ‘independent variable’ cannot be changed. For instance, if the anxiety levels of phobic and non-phobic patients were compared, the IV of ‘having a phobia’ would not have come about through any experimental manipulation. 
As with a natural experiment, the DV may be naturally occurring (e.g. exam results) or may be devised by the experimenter and measured in the fi eld or a lab. 
Strengths and limitations 
Quasi-experiments are oft en carried out under controlled conditions and therefore share some strengths of a lab experiment (e.g. replication). 
Quasi-experiments, like natural experiments, cannot randomly allocate participants to conditions and therefore there may be confounding variables. 
In addition, in both quasi-experiments and natural experiments, the IV is not deliberately changed by the researcher and therefore we cannot claim that the IV has caused any observed change. 
‘True’ experiments 
In a true experiment the IV is under the direct control of the researcher who manipulates it and records the effect on the DV. From this perspective, only lab and ÿ eld experiments are true experiments as they involve manipulation of the IV by the researcher. 
Questions 
1. 
Explain why natural and quasi-experiments cannot be classiÿ ed as ‘true’ experiments. (2 marks) 

2. 
Decide which of the following studies would be classed as true experiments and which would not. (1 mark each) 


a) 
Comparing the attitudes of psychology and sociology students towards independent study. 

b) 
Comparing the recall of students who learned a psychology theory in groups and those who learned on their own. 

c) 
Comparing the exam results of men and women. 

d) 
Comparing the progress of students who were randomly assigned at the beginning of the year to either a group taught using traditional methods or a group taught using contemporary methods. 


We might expect a rise in people’s stress levels as a result of a zombie outbreak, but what type of experiment would measure this? 
Experiments with zombies 

Questions 
1. Identify the type of experiment (lab, ÿ eld, natural or quasi) described below. (1 mark each) 
a) 
Measuring the change in stress levels in the local residents of a town following a zombie invasion. 

b) 
Comparing the performance of a group of 20 humans and a group of 20 zombies on a video game that requires divided attention and multitasking. 

c) 
Measuring the physiological response of zombies to a range of stimuli including bright light, loud noise and mild electric shocks. 

d) 
Recording the number of people who refuse to enter a lift when one zombie is in there compared to when there are three zombies in there. 


2. What are the strengths and limitations of each of the experiments described above? (2 marks each) 
Study tip 
Internal validity is about what goes on inside an experiment. Was it poorly controlled? Was the task really mundane? If so, the f ndings are probably meaningless. 
External validity is about generalising the f ndings from a study to other situations, such as everyday life. That’s the whole point of doing research! 
Students often think that lab studies don’t tell us much about everyday life because they are artif cial but that’s not always true – often it is the task that is artif cial (low mundane realism) and this can be true in a f eld experiment – reducing external validity. 
Check it 
1. 
Explain what is meant by a ‘laboratory experiment’. [3˜marks] 

2. 
Explain one strength and one limitation of a ÿ eld experiment. 


[2 marks + 2 marks] 
3. Explain the difference between a ÿ eld experiment and a natural experiment. [4 marks] 
 Types of experiment // 175 
Sampling 
The specification says… 

Sampling: the difference between population and sample; sampling techniques including: random, systematic, stratified, opportunity and volunteer; implications of sampling techniques, including bias and generalisation. 
Psychological investigations require one important ingredient – people!* 
Groups of people (participants) that form part of research studies are selected through the process of ‘sampling’. There are fve important sampling techniques used in psychology and these are discussed on this spread. 
*Or sometimes animals 
Key terms 

Population˜A group of people who are the focus of the researcher’s interest, from which a smaller sample is drawn. 
Sample˜A group of people who take part in a research investigation. The sample is drawn from a (target) population and is presumed to be representative of that population, i.e. it stands ‘fairly’ for the population being studied. 
Sampling techniques˜The method used to select people from the population. 
Bias˜In the context of sampling, when certain groups are over- or under-represented within the sample selected. For instance, there may be too many younger people or too many people of one ethnic origin in a sample. This limits the extent to which generalisations can be made to the target population. 
Generalisation˜The extent to which fndings and conclusions from a particular investigation can be broadly applied to the population. This is possible if the sample of participants is representative of the target population. 



Don’t confuse opportunity sampling and random sampling. If the word is used in its everyday sense, it could be argued that opportunity sampling involves selecting people ‘at random’. In psychology, however, random sampling involves ‘proper’ random methods. 
Hey! Who fancies being in our sample? 
Evaluation 
Random sample 
A random sample is potentially unbiased. This means that confounding or extraneous variables should be equally divided between the diff erent groups, enhancing internal validity. 
However, random sampling is diffi  cult and time-consuming to conduct. A complete list of the target population may be extremely diffi  cult to obtain. 
Furthermore, you may end up with a sample that is still unrepresentative – the laws of probability suggest that random sampling is likely to produce a more representative sample than, say, opportunity sampling. However, it is still possible that the random method may select, for example, 20 female psychology teachers from Lancashire called Joyce. 
In addition, selected participants may refuse to take part (which means you end up with something more like a volunteer sample). This particular issue applies to all of the methods below. 
Systematic sample 
This sampling method is objective. Once the system for selection has been established the researcher has no infl uence over who is chosen (this is even more the case if the start is randomly selected). 
As with random sampling, this method is time-consuming and, in the end, participants may refuse to take part, resulting in a volunteer sample. 
Stratif ed sample 
This method produces a representative sample because it is designed to accurately refl ect the composition of the population. This means that generalisation of fi ndings becomes possible. 
However, stratifi cation is not perfect. The identifi ed strata cannot refl ect all the ways that people are diff erent, so complete representation of the target population is not possible. 
Opportunity sample 
Opportunity sampling is convenient. This method is much less costly in terms of time and money than, say, random sampling, because a list of members of the target population is not required, and there is no need to divide the population into diff erent strata as there is in stratifi ed sampling. 
On the negative side, opportunity samples suff er from two forms of bias. First, the sample is unrepresentative of the target population as it is drawn from a very specifi c area, such as one street in one town, so fi ndings cannot be generalised to the target population. 
Second, the researcher has complete control over the selection of participants and, for instance, may avoid people they do not like the look of (researcher bias). 
Volunteer sample 
Collecting a volunteer sample is easy. It requires minimal input from the researcher (‘they come to you’) and so is less time-consuming than other forms of sampling. The researcher ends up with participants who are more engaged, more so than someone who was stopped in the street. 
Volunteer bias is a problem. Asking for volunteers may attract a certain ‘profi le’ of person, that is, one who is curious and more likely to try to please the researcher (which might then aff ect how far fi ndings can be generalised). 
Create a stratifi ed sample of 10 Smarties that accurately refl ects the proportion of different colours in the whole tube. How would you work it out? You might have to eat a couple to make it simpler! 
Which sampling method? 
Questions 
Decide which one of the ÿ ve sampling techniques is being used in the examples below. (1 mark each) 
1. 
Students investigating the link between age and attitudes to the legalisation of drugs stop people in the street and ask them their views. 

2. 
An occupational psychologist surveying employees about stress at work selects a sample that re° ects the overall staff ratio of management to shop ° oor workers. 

3. 
A teacher selects a sample of Year 9 students to take part in a test of selective attention by picking every third student from the register. 

4. 
A member of senior management is interested in teachers’ opinions regarding their workload. She assigns all the staff a number, places these in a hat and draws out 20 numbers. 

5. 
A university lecturer requests participants for an experiment into how expectation affects perception by placing an advert on the common room noticeboard. 


Being random 
Two psychology students designed a study on conformity. They planned to ask people to ÿ ll in a questionnaire. They arranged it so it looked like some other students had already ÿ lled in some answers. In fact the student researchers ÿ lled in the answers themselves so that most of them were wrong. The student researchers wanted to see if their participants would conform to the wrong answers. They decided to use a random sampling technique. 
Questions 
1. 
Explain how they could obtain a random sample of 20 from all the students in their school. (3 marks) 

2. 
Explain why they might have found it easier to use an opportunity sample. (2 marks) 

3. 
Explain why that might have produced a less representative sample. (2 marks) 


Check it 
1. 
Outline one strength and one limitation of random sampling. [4 marks] 

2. 
Explain what is meant by ‘stratiÿ ed sampling’. [3 marks] 

3. 
Explain the difference between a population and a sample. [3 marks] 

4. 
Explain how you would select a stratiÿ ed sample of all the male and female workers within a sausage factory. [3 marks] 


5. Explain one reason why it might be difÿ cult to make generalisations from a volunteer sample. [2 marks] 
 Sampling // 177 

Ethicalissues and ways ofdealing with them 

















Question 
Write a brieÿng and a debrieÿng statement that could be read out to each of the participants in the energy drink experiment. You’ll need to write separate ones for each of the experimental conditions. Try to make sure you include all the details and issues described on these pages to ensure that participants are treated as ethically as possible. (5 marks) 
Your understanding of ethical issues will be important throughout the whole of your study of psychology. You can use this understanding to present ethical evaluations of the studies you have read about throughout this book and may have an opportunity to discuss cost– beneft issues – can the ethical costs be justifed in terms of the benefts? 
It is important, when using ethical issues as evaluation, to remember that such issues do not challenge the fndings of a study. Just because a study might be judged unethical by today’s standards does not mean its fndings are meaningless. 
Ethical issues apply to all the di˜ erent research methods used in Psychology – it may seem as if they just apply to experiments but you have yet to read about the others! 
Ways of dealing with ethical issues 
BPS code of conduct 
The British Psychological Society (BPS), like many other professional bodies, has its own BPS code of ethics and this includes a set of ethical guidelines. Researchers have a professional duty to observe these guidelines when conducting research – they won’t be sent to prison if they don’t follow them but they may well lose their job. 
The guidelines are closely matched to the ethical issues on the facing page and attempt to ensure that all participants are treated with respect and consideration during each phase of research. Guidelines are implemented by ethics committees in research institutions who oft en use a cost–benefi t approach to determine whether particular research proposals are ethically acceptable (see Apply it below). 
Dealing with informed consent 
Participants should be issued with a consent letter or form detailing all relevant information that might aff ect their decision to participate. Assuming the participant agrees, this is then signed. For investigations involving children under 16, a signature of parental consent is required. There are other ways to obtain consent, which are described on the right. 
Dealing with deception and protection from harm 
At the end of a study, participants should be given a full debrief. Within this, participants should be made aware of the true aims of the investigation and any details they were not supplied with during the study, such as the existence of other groups or experimental conditions. 
Participants should also be told what their data will be used for and must be given the right to withdraw during the study and the right to withhold data if they wish. This is particularly important if retrospective consent is a feature of the study (see right). 
Participants may have natural concerns related to their performance within the investigation, and so should be reassured that their behaviour was typical or normal. In extreme cases, if participants have been subject to stress or embarrassment, they may require counselling, which the researcher should provide. 
Dealing with conf dentiality 
If personal details are held these must be protected. However it is more usual to simply record no personal details, i.e. maintain anonymity. Researchers usually refer to participants using numbers or initials when writing up the investigation. In a case study, psychologists oft en use initials when describing the individual or individuals involved (see the study of HM on page 48). 
Finally, it is standard practice that during briefi ng and debriefi ng, participants are reminded that their data will be protected throughout the process and told that the data will not be shared with other researchers.   
Cost–benef t analysis 
It is the responsibility of ethics committees to weigh up the costs and beneÿ ts of research proposals to decide whether a research study should go ahead. Beneÿ ts might include the value or groundbreaking nature of the research. Possible costs may be the damaging effect on individual participants or to the reputation of psychology as a whole. (3 marks each) 
Questions 
Imagine you are sitting on an ethics committee. Should the following investigations go ahead? Do a cost–beneÿ t analysis of each. 
1. 
A teacher actively discriminates against the children who have blue eyes in her Year 5 class (and encourages the non-blue-eyed classmates to do the same) by withholding privileges and giving them more difÿ cult tasks to do. This was a study to demonstrate the evils of ethnic prejudice (Elliott 1968). 

2. 
As a naïve participant sits in a waiting room, (fake) smoke is pumped under the door suggesting that the next room is on ÿ re. A group of confederates have been told to remain passive and not raise the alarm. This is an investigation into the factors that in° uence behaviour in an emergency (Latané and Darley 1968). 


Alternative ways of getting consent 
From a researcher’s point of view the problem with asking for informed consent is that it may spoil the research – participants then know what is being studied and alter their behaviour accordingly. Psychologists have tried to address this problem by devising three alternatives: 
˜ Presumptive consent – rather than getting consent from the participants themselves, a similar group of people are asked if the study is acceptable. If this group agrees, then consent of the original participants is ‘presumed’. 
˜ Prior general consent – participants give their permission to take part in a number of different studies – including one that will involve deception. By consenting, participants are effectively consenting to be deceived. 
˜ Retrospective consent – participants are asked for their consent (during debrieÿ ng) having already taken part in the study. They may not have been aware of their participation or they may have been subject to deception. 
Question 
None of these methods are considered ‘ideal’ by researchers. What would you suggest are the main problems with each? (2 marks each) 


Cost–beneÿ t analysis 
The role of ethics committees is to make judgements about the costs and benefi ts involved in carrying out individual pieces of research. 
Check it 
1. 
Using an example, explain what is meant by ‘ethical issue’. [3 marks] 

2. 
Outline one ethical issue in psychology. Explain how this issue could be dealt with. [3 marks] 

3. 
Brie° y explain the role of the British Psychological Society’s code of ethics in psychological research.  [4 marks] 

4. 
Discuss ethical issues in psychological research. Refer to one or more research studies in your answer. 


[12 marks AS, 16 marks A level] 
 Ethical issues and ways of dealing with them // 179 
Pilot studies (and more) 
The specification says… 
Pilot studies and the aims of piloting. 
Pilot studies are an important element of research design. They allow a researcher to test investigation procedures with a small group of participants before the investigation begins. 
We shall consider the aims of piloting on this spread as well as some of the other features of experimental design that have not been mentioned elsewhere. 
Key term 
Pilot study˜A small-scale version of an investigation that takes place before the real investigation is conducted. The aim is to check that procedures, materials, measuring scales, etc., work. The aim is also to allow the researcher to make changes or modif cations if necessary. 
Study tip 
Many students misunderstand the purpose of pilot studies and often assume they have something to do with testing or f nding support for the hypothesis. They don’t. ‘Piloting’, as it is sometimes referred to, is an important part of the design process that makes the researcher aware of problems that can be f xed before data gathering begins. 
Piloting 
Remember the energy drink study? How could you forget? 
An experienced researcher has taken a look at our proposed design and suggested we conduct a pilot study before carrying out the main investigation. 
Question 
Explain, in as much detail as you can, how such a pilot study could be done and what, as researchers, we might learn from it. (4 marks) 
SpeedUpp 
Answer these questions on the energy drink investigation. (2 marks each) 
Questions 
1. 
Explain why a single-blind procedure may be useful in reducing the effects of demand characteristics. 

2. 
If a single-blind procedure was used, explain what would have to happen at the end of the study. 

3. 
Explain how you might set up a double-blind procedure. 

4. 
Explain how this would be effective in reducing the in° uence of investigator effects within the experiment. 

5. 
Which condition of the energy drink experiment is the control group? Explain what purpose this group serves. 


Pilot studies 
The aims of piloting 
A pilot study is a small-scale trial run of the actual investigation. 
A pilot study involves a handful of participants, rather than the total number, in order to ‘road-test’ the procedure and check the investigation runs smoothly. 
It is also important to recognise that pilot studies are not just restricted to experimental studies. When using self-report methods, such as questionnaires or interviews, it is helpful to try out questions in advance and remove or reword those that are ambiguous or confusing. 
In observational studies, a pilot study provides a way of checking coding systems before the real investigation is undertaken. This may be an important part of training observers. 
In short then, a pilot study allows the researcher to identify any potential issues and to modify the design or procedure, saving time and money in the long run. 
Some other things you should know 
Single-blind procedure 
We mentioned, when discussing 
ethical issues, that participants  Single-blind test  
will sometimes not be told  ?  
the aim of the research at the  Participants  
beginning of a study. As well as  Unaware of the test being conducted  
this, other details may be kept from participants, such as which  ?  Control pills regular  
condition of the experiment they are in or whether there is another condition at all. This  Test pills placebo  Researcher Aware of the test being conducted  
is known as a single-blind  
procedure – any information  
that might create expectations  

is not revealed until the end of the study to control for the confounding eff ects of demand characteristics (see page 170). 
Double-blind procedure 

In a double-blind procedure 
Double-blind test
neither the participants nor the researcher who conducts the 
? 
Participants
study is aware of the aims of ?
Unaware of the test being conducted
the investigation (oft en a third party conducts the investigation ? without knowing its main 
Control pills 
regular 
purpose). 
Researcher 
Unaware of the test Test pills being conducted placebo 
Double-blind procedures are oft en an important feature of drug trials. Treatment may be administered to participants by someone who is independent of the investigation and who does not know which drugs are real and which are placebos (‘fake’ drugs). If they don’t know what each participant is receiving then expectations cannot infl uence participant behaviour. 
Control groups and conditions 
In the example of the drug trial above, the group that receives the real drug is the experimental group and the group that receives the placebo is the control group. 
We use the word ‘control’ in research to refer to the control of variables but we use it here to refer to setting a baseline. Control is used in many experimental studies for the purpose of comparison. If the change in behaviour of the experimental group is signifi cantly greater than that of the control group, then the researcher can conclude that the cause of this eff ect was the independent variable (assuming all other possible confounding variables have remained constant). 
Having two groups in an experiment is an independent groups design, but we can also have control conditions in a repeated measures design. Each participant takes part twice – once in the experimental condition and then in the control condition. 



experiment. (1 mark) 
8. 
Explain one way in which the teacher could have dealt with the ethical issue that you identiÿed in your answer to question 7. (3 marks) 

9. 
Explain what is meant by ‘operationalisation’ when designing experiments. (2°marks) 

10. 
Explain how the teacher has operationalised ‘difference in texting’ within this experiment. (1°mark) 

11. 
Explain what is meant by ‘confounding variable’. (2 marks) 

12. 
Explain one way in which investigator effects may confound the ÿndings of this experiment. (3 marks) 



Fake estimates 
A sixth-form psychology student was interested in the effect of social in°uence on behaviour and decided to conduct an experiment. She approached 40 Year 11 students around her school and presented each of them with a picture of a crowd scene. Each participant was asked to estimate how many people were in the picture. 
20 participants (Group A) were shown the picture of the crowd scene only. The other 20 participants (Group B) were shown the picture of the crowd scene alongside ÿve numbers that, they were told, were the estimates of other participants who had guessed before them. 
Based on the size of the crowd, these guesses were clearly too high, but the psychology student wanted to know whether these would affect the estimates of the participants in Group B. 
Questions 
1. 
What is the independent variable in this experiment? (2 marks) 

2. 
What is the dependent variable in this experiment? (2 marks) 

3. 
Identify the experimental design used in this experiment. (1 mark) 

4. 
Explain one advantage of the experimental design you identiÿed in your answer to question 3. Refer to this experiment in your answer. (3 marks) 

5. 
Write a suitable hypothesis for this experiment. (2 marks) 

6. 
Identify the sampling method used in this experiment. Justify your answer. (2 marks) 

7. 
Explain how random allocation could have been used in this experiment. (2 marks) 

8. 
Write a debrieÿ ng statement that could be read out to the participants in Group B. (4 marks) 

9. 
Explain why standardisation is important when conducting experimental research. (2 marks) 

10. 
Explain one way in which the procedure of this experiment could have been standardised. (2 marks) 

11. 
Explain what is meant by ‘extraneous variable’. (1 mark) 

12. 
Identify one extraneous variable in this experiment, explain why it 




Gender differences in texting 
A teacher was interested to know whether there was a difference in the number of mobile phone texts boys and girls send each day. 
The teacher selected a random sample of 20 boys and 20 girls from the whole school and got them to record the number of texts they had sent at the end of each day. 
After two weeks, the teacher compared the total number of texts for boys and girls and found there was very little difference between them. 
Questions 
1. 
This is an example of a quasi-experiment. Explain why this is a quasi-experiment. (2 marks) 

2. 
Explain one disadvantage of a quasi-experiment. Refer to this experiment in your answer. (3 marks) 

3. 
The teacher used random sampling to select participants. Explain how the teacher may have used random sampling in this experiment. (3 marks) 

4. 
Explain one strength of using random sampling in this experiment. 


(2 marks) Before the experiment began, the teacher conducted a pilot study. Explain why the teacher decided to conduct a pilot study. (2 marks) 
6. 
Explain how social desirability bias may have affected the outcome of this experiment. (3 marks) 

7. 
Identify one ethical issue that the teacher should have taken account of when conducting this 


 Pilot studies (and more) // 181 
Observational techniques 
The specification says… 
Observational techniques. Types of observation: naturalistic and controlled observation; covert and overt observation; participant and non­participant observation. 

The experimental method may not always provide the most suitable way to study a particular behaviour. There are a number of non experimental methods available to psychologists, one of which is observation. 
On this spread we consider the di.erent types of observational method, as well as the strengths and limitations of each. 
Key terms 

Naturalistic observation˜Watching and recording behaviour in the setting within which it would normally occur. 
Controlled observation˜Watching and recording behaviour within a structured environment, i.e. one where some variables are managed. 
Covert observation˜Participants’ behaviour is watched and recorded without their knowledge or consent. 
Overt observation˜Participants’ behaviour is watched and recorded with their knowledge and consent. 
Participant observation˜The researcher becomes a member of the group whose behaviour he/she is watching and recording. 
Non-participant observation˜The researcher remains outside of the group whose behaviour he/she is watching and recording. 

Types of observation 













One important non-experimental method is observation. Observations provide psychologists with a way of seeing what people do without having to ask them (as in studies involving self-report methods – a joy yet to come). They also allow researchers to study observable behaviour within a natural or controlled setting (see below). This method allows a researcher the flexibility to study more complex interactions between variables. 
Note that observation is often used within an experiment as a way, for example, of assessing the dependent variable. 

Naturalistic and controlled observations 
























Naturalistic observations take place in the setting or context where the target behaviour would usually occur. All aspects of the environment are free to vary. For instance, it would not make sense to study how senior management and employees in a particular factory interact by dragging the whole of the workforce into an artificial lab setting. It is much better to study ‘interaction’ in the factory environment where it would normally take place. 
It is sometimes useful to control certain aspects of the research situation, so a controlled observation may be preferred. For example, Mary Ainsworth made use of a controlled observation as part of her Strange Situation studies (see page 86). Ainsworth recorded the way in which children reacted to their mothers and how they dealt with the introduction of a stranger within a specially designed playroom environment. Ainsworth and her team recorded their data remotely, via a two-way mirror, so as not to disturb the action. 
In a controlled observation there is some control over variables, including manipulating variables to observe effects and also control of confounding/extraneous variables. 
Covert and overt observations 












Behaviour may occasionally be recorded without first obtaining the consent of the participants. Covert observations are those in which the participants are unaware they are the focus of study and their behaviour is observed in secret (covertly), say from across a room or from a balcony (but rarely from behind a bush). Such behaviour must be public and happening anyway if the observation is to be ethical. 
In contrast, overt observations are when participants know their behaviour is being observed and have given their informed consent beforehand. 

Participant and non-participant observations 
























Sometimes it may be necessary for the observer to become part of the group they are studying, as is the case with participant observations. For instance, we might have improved the study of factory workers and management (referred to above) by having the researcher actually join the workforce to produce a first-hand account. 
Non-participant observations are when the researcher remains separate from those they are studying and records behaviour in a more objective manner. It may often be impractical or even impossible to join particular groups so that non-participation is the only option – such as a middle-aged female researcher observing behaviour amongst Year 10 students at a boys’ school! 

On page 168 we describe the aims’ of an experiment. All research studies have aims – they’re not just for experiments. 


insane places 
A very famous observational study was conducted by David Rosenhan (1973), investigating the problem of deÿning abnormality. 
Rosenhan arranged for eight pseudopatients, one of whom was himself, to present themselves individually to various psychiatric institutions in the US complaining of fake symptoms of mental disorder. These symptoms included hearing voices. All eight pseudopatients were admitted and given a diagnosis of schizophrenia except in one case. 
Once the pseudopatients had gained access to the psychiatric institution, the observation began. Each pseudopatient stopped pretending to have symptoms and instead observed and recorded the daily life of the patients in the institution – the usual ward routine, interactions with the staff, etc. 
One notable ÿnding was the way in which staff at the hospital behaved towards the researchers. Despite the fact that many of the genuine patients quickly realised that the pseudopatients were fake, staff were slower to catch on. 
Signiÿcant also was the way in which the behaviour of the pseudopatients was regarded by staff. Note-taking by one of the researchers was described as ‘repetitive writing behaviour’ in their patient notes, and pacing the corridors, which researchers often engaged in to ease their boredom, was interpreted as a sign of anxiety. In short, the ‘normal’ behaviour of the researchers was seen by staff at the various hospitals as ‘symptomatic’ of the mental disorder they had been labelled with. 
Questions 
1. Is Rosenhan’s observational study: 
a) 
Naturalistic or controlled? (1 mark) 

b) 
Covert or overt? (1 mark) 

c) 
Participant or non-participant? (1 mark) 


2. This study is seen as a powerful example of the in°uence that the label ‘mental disorder’ has on the way we view behaviour but how valid is the method used? Identify two strengths and two limitations of the observational methods used in this study. (4°marks) 
Study tip 
There is a tendency to confuse controlled observations with laboratory experiments, whilst naturalistic observations are often mixed up with natural experiments! 
Remember that although there may be variables in an observation there is no independent variable (IV). In an experiment, this IV either exists regardless of the researcher (as in a natural or quasi-experiment) or is manipulated by the experimenter (in a lab or feld experiment). 

Check it 

Observational design 
The specification says… 

Observational design: behavioural categories; event sampling; time sampling. 
On the previous spread we considered observational techniques – the di.erent types of observation available to psychologists. Here, we focus on how a researcher would actually plan an observational study. 
Key terms 

Behavioural categories˜When a target behaviour is broken up into components that are observable and measurable (operationalisation). 
Event sampling˜A target behaviour or event is frst established then the researcher records this event every time it occurs. 
Time sampling˜A target individual or group is frst established then the researcher records their behaviour in a fxed time frame, say, every 60 seconds. 



Study tip 
It is important you are able to put into practice what you learn by designing and carrying out your own investigations using observational methods. So, on this spread, we discuss how to design observational research, having described and evaluated di.erent types of observation on the previous spread. 
What do students do when their teacher leaves the room? 
The record sheet below is used to record behaviour. A behaviour checklist is given (across the top) with space below to record the behaviour of a target student. A tally mark is placed each time one of the behaviours is observed – an example of event sampling. 
Carries on working  Uses mobile phone  Talks to another student  Listens to music  Leaves the room  Reads a magazine  Falls asleep  Eats  
IIII  I  III  II  I  

Evaluation 
Structured versus unstructured 
Structured observations that involve the use of behavioural 
categories make the recording of data easier and more 
systematic. The data produced is likely to be numerical (see the 
discussion of quantitative data on page 192), which means 
that analysing and comparing the behaviour observed between 
participants is more straightforward. In contrast, unstructured 
observations tend to produce qualitative data, which may be 
much more diffi  cult to record and analyse. 
However, unstructured observations benefi t from more 
richness and depth of detail in the data collected. Though 
there may be a greater risk of observer bias with unstructured 
observations, as the objective behavioural categories that are 
a feature of structured observations are not present here. The 
researcher may only record those behaviours that ‘catch their eye’ 
and these may not be the most important or useful. 
Behavioural categories 
Although the use of behavioural categories can make data collection more structured and objective, it is important that such categories are as clear and unambiguous as possible. They must be observable, measurable and self-evident. In other words, they should not require further interpretation. 
Researchers should also ensure that all possible forms of the target behaviour are included in the checklist. There should not be a ‘dustbin category’ in which many diff erent behaviours are deposited. 
Finally, categories should be exclusive and not overlap. For instance, the diff erence between ‘smiling’ and ‘grinning’ would be very diffi  cult to discern. 
Sampling methods 
Event sampling is useful when the target behaviour or event happens quite infrequently and could be missed if time sampling was used. However, if the specifi ed event is too complex, the observer may overlook important details if using event sampling. 
Time sampling is eff ective in reducing the number of observations that have to be made. That said, those instances when behaviour is sampled might be unrepresentative of the observation as a whole. 
Psychologists monitoring a group of people having a meeting. 
Behavioural categories 
Task 
Draw up a behavioural checklist of facial expressions that might be observed in a six-month-old baby. Try to observe all the ‘rules’ of behavioural categories explained on this spread. (4 marks) 
Methods: Observation: Over to you 
Observational techniques are often used as a means of assessing the dependent variable (DV) in an experiment. 
Task 
You could conduct an experiment looking at the differences in the way men or women behave when in same-gender pairs/groups and opposite-gender pairs/ groups (it would be a natural experiment if you observe ‘self-determined’ pairs). 
In this study the independent variable (IV) is same-gender or opposite-gender pairs. You need to measure the DV – the differences in the way men or women behave. To measure this you can observe their behaviour. 
Follow the steps below in designing your study. 
Decisions to make 
Aim and hypothesis 
• 
What is the aim of your study? 

• 
If this is an experiment, what is the hypothesis? Is it directional or non-directional? 


Decide on design of the observation 
• 
Setting – controlled or naturalistic? 

• 
Observer’s status – covert or overt? 

• 
Observer’s involvement – participant or non-participant? 

• 
Sampling method – continuous, time sampling or event sampling? 


Decide how DV will be recorded 
• 
Unstructured observations or structured ones? 

• 
Fully operationalise the DV into behavioural categories. 

• 
Create a behaviour checklist (record sheet) to record frequency of observations. 


Consider ethical issues 
• 
Can covert observations be justifi ed? 

• 
Is this a public behaviour that would be happening anyway? 


Analysis of data 
• How will you present your results? (For ideas see pages 196–197.) 
Check it 
1. 
Explain how you would use time sampling in an observation of children’s aggression in the playground. [4 marks] 

2. 
Imagine you are conducting an observation of the ‘conÿ dence’ shown by students in a lesson. Operationalise the behaviour ‘conÿ dence’ using three behavioural categories. [3 marks] 

3. 
With reference to your answer to question 2, design a record sheet that could be used to observe the difference in conÿ dence between male and female students in a Year 12 class. [3˜marks] 


 Observational design // 185 
Self-report techniques 
The specification says… 
Self-report techniques: questionnaires, use of open and closed questions; interviews, structured and unstructured. 



2. Which of the following are associated with open questions and which are associated with closed questions? (1 mark each) 
a) 
Responses tend to include greater depth/detail. 

b) 
Often involves ticking a box or circling an answer. 

c) 
Responses are easier to compare. 

d) 
Respondents can’t explain their answers. 

e) 
Conclusions drawn may be open to bias. 

f) 
Difÿcult to collate and summarise data. 


Sometimes the most straightforward way of understanding why people behave in the way that they do is to ask them. This is the self report method and it comprises questionnaires and interviews, two separate techniques that we shall consider on this spread. 
Key terms 

Self-report technique˜Any method in which a person is asked to state or explain their own feelings, opinions, behaviours and/or experiences related to a given topic. 
Questionnaire˜A set of written questions (sometimes referred to as ‘items’) used to assess a person’s thoughts and/or experiences. 
Interview˜A ‘live’ encounter (face-to-face or on the phone) where one person (the interviewer) asks a set of questions to assess an interviewee’s thoughts and/or experiences. The questions may be pre-set (as in a structured interview) or may develop as the interview goes along 
Questions 
1. Write one closed and one open question for each of the following scenarios. (2 marks each) 
a) 
A psychologist interviewed PE teachers at a local school to assess the pupils’ attitudes towards exercise. 

b) 
A teacher distributed a questionnaire to her pupils to assess their mood on a Monday morning. 

c) 
A doctor produced a patient questionnaire to assess whether a new computer system had affected waiting times for appointments. 

d) 
A scientist designed a questionnaire to assess people’s anxiety levels about a zombie apocalypse. 


Evaluation 
Strengths 
Questionnaires are cost-eff ective. They can gather large amounts of data quickly because they can be distributed to large numbers of people (note that it is the number of people that is important as this determines the volume of data collected). A questionnaire can be completed without the researcher being present, as in the case of a postal questionnaire, which also reduces the eff ort involved. 
The data that questionnaires produce is usually straightforward to analyse and this is particularly the case if the questionnaire comprises mainly fi xed-choice closed questions (contrast this with interview data, below). The data lends itself to statistical analysis, and comparisons between groups of people can be made using graphs and charts. 
Limitations 
A major problem is that the responses given may not always be truthful. Respondents may be keen to present themselves in a positive light and this may infl uence their answers. For example, if asked ‘How oft en do you lose your phone?’, most people would underestimate the frequency. This is a form of demand characteristic called social desirability bias. 
Questionnaires oft en produce a response bias, which is where respondents tend to reply in a similar way, for instance, always ticking ‘yes’ or answering at the same favoured end of a rating scale (discussed on the next spread). This may be because respondents complete the questionnaire too quickly and fail to read questions properly. A particular form of response bias, acquiescence bias, is discussed on the right. 
Evaluation 
Structured interviews 
Structured interviews, like questionnaires, are straightforward to replicate due to their standardised format. The format also reduces diff erences between interviewers. 
It is not possible, however, given the nature of the structured interview, for interviewers to deviate from the topic or explain their questions and this will limit the richness of the data collected as well as limit unexpected information. 
Unstructured interviews 
There is much more fl exibility in an unstructured than in a structured interview. The interviewer can follow up points as they arise and is much more likely to gain insight into the worldview of the interviewee, including eliciting unexpected information. 
However, this may lead to an increased risk of interviewer bias. In addition, analysis of data from an unstructured interview is not straightforward. The researcher may have to sift  through much irrelevant information and drawing fi rm conclusions may be diffi  cult. 
As with questionnaires, there is a risk that interviewees may lie for reasons of social desirability. However, a skilled and experienced interviewer should be able to establish suffi  cient rapport with the participant so that even when sensitive and personal topics are discussed, any responses given are more truthful. 
Questionnaires or interviews 

Questions 
Sort the following points into two categories: those that are more likely 
to apply to questionnaires, or to interviews, or to both. (1 mark each) 
1. 
Responses are easy to analyse. 

2. 
Involves large numbers of participants. 

3. 
Qualitative data. 

4. 
Can create rapport between researcher and participant. 

5. 
More control over responses. 

6. 
Formal structure. 

7. 
The respondent can be encouraged to elaborate. 


Social desirability bias 
The following items appeared in a questionnaire: 
1. 
Have you ever lied to a teacher? YES/NO 

2. 
Do you enjoy homework? YES/NO 

3. 
Have you ever forgotten your mum’s/dad’s/sibling’s birthday? YES/NO 

4. 
Do you regularly recycle? YES/NO 



Question 
Explain why the items above may produce a social desirability bias. (2 marks) 
Looks like the interview is going well. 
Acquiescence bias and the F-scale 
Acquiescence bias (or ‘yea-saying’) is the tendency to agree with items on a questionnaire regardless of the content of the question. 
Douglas Jackson and Samuel Messick (1961) demonstrated acquiescence bias using the F-scale, a standard questionnaire that measures authoritarianism (see page 29). They created a reversed version of the F-scale where all the items were the opposite in meaning to the original questionnaire. They gave both the original and reversed versions to the same group of respondents and found a strong positive correlation (see page 190) between the two sets of results (which is not what you would expect). 
Question 
What does this suggest was happening each time participants answered the F-scale questionnaires? (2 marks) 
Check it 
1. Explain one strength and one limitation of collecting data using a questionnaire. 
[3˜marks +3 marks] 
2. 
Explain the difference between a questionnaire and an interview. [2 marks] 

3. 
Explain why a researcher may decide to use a structured interview rather than an unstructured interview. [2 marks] 

4. 
Brie° y evaluate the use of interviews in psychological research. [4 marks]


 Self-report techniques // 187 
Self-report design 
The specification says… 
Questionnaire construction; design of interviews. 

Having introduced questionnaires and interviews on the previous spread, we now turn to issues involved in the design of these self report techniques. 
Key terms 

Open questions˜Questions for which there is no fxed choice of response and respondents can answer in any way they wish. For example, Why did you take up smoking? 
Closed questions˜Questions for which there is a fxed choice of responses determined by the question setter. For example, Do you smoke? (yes/no) 
Study tip 
It is important you are able to put into practice what you learn by designing and carrying out your own self-report investigations on a variety of topics. So, on this spread, we discuss how to design e.ective questionnaires and interviews, having described and evaluated these methods on the previous spread. 


Questions 
Indicate which of the following are open questions and which are closed questions. (1 mark each) 
1. 
Do you think recycling is important? (YES/NO) 

2. 
Explain your answer to question 1. 

3. 
How often is your rubbish bin collected? (tick the option that applies) 

once a week        once a fortnight once a month other 

4. 
How likely are you to recycle the following items in an average week? 


Plastic bottles 
   Very likely   1  2  3  4  5   Not at all likely  
Cans 
   Very likely   1  2  3  4  5   Not at all likely  
5. How old are you?  


Writing good questions 
Clarity is essential when designing questionnaires and interviews. If respondents are confused by or misinterpret particular questions, this will have a negative impact on the quality of the information received. With this in mind, the following are common errors in question design that should be avoided where possible. 
Overuse of jargon 
Jargon refers to technical terms that are only familiar to those within a specialised fi eld or area. For instance, the following question includes jargon: 
Do you agree that maternal deprivation in early childhood inevitably 
leads to a. ectionless psychopathy in later life? 
Of course as psychology specialists who have read Chapter 3 you know all about maternal deprivation but to the layperson this would be confusing. It is also unnecessarily complex – the best questions are simple and easily understood. 
Emotive language and leading questions 
Sometimes, a researcher’s attitude towards a particular topic is clear from the way in which the question is phrased, as in the following examples: 
Boxing is a barbaric sport and any sane person would want it banned. 
Is it not obvious that student fees should be abolished? 
When did you last drive over the speed limit? 
In the fi rst example, the words ‘barbaric’ and ‘sane’ are emotive and should be replaced with more neutral alternatives. The second example is a leading question as it guides the respondent towards a particular answer. The third example is also leading as it assumes that the person being questioned has broken the speed limit at some point! 
Double-barrelled questions and double negatives 
A double-barrelled question contains two questions in one, the issue being that respondents may agree with one half of the question and not the other. 
Do you agree with the following statement? 
Premier league footballers are overpaid and should have to give twenty 
per cent of their wages to charity. 
Finally, questions that include double negatives can be diffi  cult for respondents to decipher. 
I am not unhappy in my job. (Agree / Disagree) 
There is a much more straightforward way of asking this question – see if you can work it out! 
Interviewer bias 
Standardisation of questions within an interview is one way of controlling for the possible effects of interviewer bias. However, this may not remove bias entirely. This is especially true if the interview is unstructured because the interviewer controls the way the discussion develops and the lines of enquiry followed. 
Question 
Read back through this chapter and identify at least four forms of bias in psychological research – and the steps taken to minimise these (hint: there are lots!). (2 marks for each form of bias and how to minimise it) 
Self-report: Over to you 
Task: 
Design a questionnaire that could be distributed to students at school or college. Perhaps you could investigate some aspect of school life that people may have strong views about such as how much homework students receive or whether school uniform should be worn. 
You might conduct this as a quasi-experiment and compare the views of boys and girls or students across different year groups. In this case the questionnaire is being used to assess a dependent variable. 
Follow the steps below in designing your study. 
Decisions to make 
Aim and hypothesis 
• 
What is the aim of your study? 

• 
If an experiment, what is the hypothesis, is it directional or non-directional? 


Decide items for your questionnaire 
• 
Open questions? 

• 
Closed questions (Likert scale, rating scale, fi xed-choice option)? 


Pilot the questionnaire 
• Remove/reword questions that are too complex, leading, double­barrelled, etc. 
Sampling 
• 
What is your target population? 

• 
How will you select participants? 


Consider ethical issues 
• 
How will you gain informed consent? 

• 
How will you ensure anonymity/confi dentiality? 


Analysis of data 
• How will you present your results? (For ideas see pages 196–197.) 
The importance of a pilot study 
Before the study begins, questionnaire and interview questions should always be piloted. Reread the discussion on the aims of piloting on page.180 and answer the following questions. 
Questions 
1. 
Brie° y explain what is meant by a pilot study. (2 marks) 

2. 
Describe how a pilot study of a questionnaire or interview would be carried out. (3 marks) 

3. 
Explain what would be gained from conducting the pilot study and what the researcher might do as a result. (3 marks) 


Check it 
1. 
Using the example of a questionnaire that measures stress in the workplace, explain the difference between closed and open questions.    [4 marks] 

2. 
Explain two issues that should be considered when designing interviews.  [4 marks] 

3. 
Explain two issues that should be considered when designing questionnaires.     [4 marks] 


 Self-report design // 189 
Correlations 
The specification says… 
Correlations. Analysis of the relationship between 
co-variables. The difference between correlations and 
experiments. Positive, negative and zero correlations. 

We now turn to the fourth main research method in the Year 1 specifcation - correlation. Properly speaking, correlation is a method of analysis not a research method but it is easier to just say ‘correlation’ rather than ‘studies using correlational analysis’. 
Key terms 

Correlation˜A mathematical technique in which a researcher investigates an association between two variables, called co-variables. 
Co-variables˜The variables investigated within a correlation, for example height and weight. They are not referred to as the independent and dependent variables because a correlation investigates the association between the variables, rather than trying to show a cause-and-e.ect relationship. 
Positive correlation˜As one co-variable increases so does the other. For example, the number of people in a room and noise tend to be positively correlated. 
Negative correlation˜As one co-variable increases the other decreases. For example, the number of people in a room and amount of personal space tend to be negatively correlated. 
Zero correlation˜When there is no relationship between the co-variables. For example, the association between the number of people in a room in Manchester and the total daily rainfall in Peru is likely to be zero. 


Positive and negative correlations 

Questions 
Are the following positive or negative correlations? (1 mark each) 
1. 
The more aggressive the parents, the more aggressive their children are. 

2. 
The hotter the temperature, the fewer clothes people wear. 

3. 
The fewer sweets eaten, the fewer ÿllings needed. 

4. 
The colder the weather, the higher people’s fuel bills. 

5. 
The more people exercise, the less their 


Scattergrams to show the relationships between number of caffeine drinks and anxiety level 
risk of heart disease. 
(left), number of caffeine drinks and hours of sleep (middle) and number of caffeine drinks and 
6. 
More sociable people have more friends. number of dogs seen in the street (right). 

7. 
The fewer hours of daylight, the more depressed people there are. 

8. 
The more ÿlms you watch, the more interesting you are. 


Number of caffeine drinks 



Evaluation 
Strengths 
Correlations are a useful preliminary tool for research. By assessing the strength and direction of a relationship, they provide a precise and quantifi able measure of how two variables are related. This may suggest ideas for possible future research if variables are strongly related or demonstrate an interesting pattern. Correlations are oft en used as a starting point to assess possible patterns between variables before researchers commit to an experimental study. 
Correlations are relatively quick and economical to carry out. There is no need for a controlled environment and no manipulation of variables is required. Data collected by others (secondary data such as government statistics) can be used, which means correlations are less time-consuming than experiments. 
Limitations 
As a result of the lack of experimental manipulation and control within a correlation, studies can only tell us how variables are related but not why. Correlations cannot demonstrate cause and eff ect between variables and therefore we do not know which co-variable is causing the other to change. For instance – in the example on the facing page – we cannot conclude that drinking caff eine causes anxiety. It may be that people who are already anxious drink more caff eine as a result. So, establishing the direction of the eff ect is an issue. 
It may also be the case that another untested variable is causing the relationship between the two co-variables we are interested in – an intervening variable (also known as the third variable problem). Perhaps people who have high-pressured jobs – and hence spend a lot of their time feeling anxious – drink a lot of caff eine because they work long hours and need to remain alert. Thus, the key unaccounted-for variable here is job type which, in eff ect, is causing the relationship between the other two co-variables. 
Largely because of the issues above, correlations can occasionally be misused or misinterpreted. Relationships between variables are sometimes presented as causal when they aren’t – especially by the media. Consider the claim that people from ‘broken’ homes are more likely to become criminals. This is oft en misinterpreted to mean that the broken home is what caused the criminality and therefore people from broken homes will inevitably become criminals. 
Such conclusions are absurd. There are many intervening or ‘third’ variables at work here, such as poverty being a cause of the broken home and also the key factor in criminality. This might explain the apparent link between a broken home and criminality. 
Correlational hypotheses 
Hypotheses written for correlations are not the same as those for experiments. There is no IV or DV in a correlation. The hypothesis still has to clearly state the expected relationship between variables – but co-variables in this case, which must be clearly operationalised. 
Also, as with experimental hypotheses, correlational hypotheses can be directional or non-directional. A directional hypothesis for the chocolate correlation (above right) could be: 
There is a positive correlation between the price of a chocolate bar and its tastiness rating (out of 20). 
Whereas the equivalent non-directional hypothesis would be: 
There is a correlation between the price of a chocolate bar and its tastiness rating (out of 20). 
Question 
Write directional and non-directional hypotheses for the caffeine and anxiety level study, and the caffeine and sleep study, described on this spread. (2 marks for each hypothesis) 
Yeah it tastes great obviously 
– but is it worth the money? 
Correlation: Over to you 
Is there a correlation between the price of chocolate and how tasty it is? Why not test this on your friends? This might be one of the more expensive investigations you carry out but, chances are, your friends will like you a lot more afterwards! 
Buy ÿ ve bars of chocolate ranging from cheap to, well, not so cheap! Get a friend to try each one – blindfolded – and rate them for tastiness on a scale, say, out of twenty. 

Questions 
1. 
Analyse the data by sketching a scattergram of the data for each co-variable (price of chocolate plotted against tastiness rating) to see if there is a relationship between the two. (3 marks) 

2. 
Then try it again with another two or three participants to see if results are similar – assuming your chocolate budget will stretch that far! Remember, it’s all in the name of science… (3 marks) 


Curvilinear relationships 
Some relationships are more complex than positive or negative correlations. The Yerkes-Dodson law of arousal states that performance is at its best when there is a moderate (optimal) level of arousal and will deteriorate if the arousal level is too low or too high. 
low medium high Arousal 
Question 
Can you think of any co-variables that might demonstrate such a relationship? (1 mark for each pair of co-variables) 
Check it 
1. 
Explain what is meant by a ‘correlation’. [2˜marks] 

2. 
Explain one strength and one limitation of the use of correlations in psychological research. [6 marks] 

3. 
Using an example for each, explain the difference between a positive and a negative correlation.


 [4 marks] 
Performance 
 Correlations // 191 
Types of data 
The specification says… 
Qualitative and quantitative data; the distinction between qualitative and quantitative data collection techniques. Primary and secondary data, including meta-analysis. 

When an investigation is conducted, data is collected. This may be words, numbers, images, sounds etc. There are di.erent ways to describe types of data. 
Key terms 

Qualitative data˜Data that is expressed in words and non-numerical (although qualitative data may be converted to numbers for the purposes of analysis). 
Quantitative data˜Data that can be counted, usually given as numbers. 
Primary data˜Information that has been obtained frst-hand by a researcher for the purposes of a research project. In psychology, such data is often gathered directly from participants as part of an experiment, self-report or observation. 
Secondary data˜Information that has already been collected by someone else and so pre-dates the current research project. In psychology, such data might include the work of other psychologists or government statistics. 
Meta-analysis˜The process of combining the fndings from a number of studies on a particular topic. The aim is to produce an overall statistical conclusion (the e.ect size) based on a range of studies. A meta-analysis should not be confused with a review where a number of studies are compared and discussed. 
192 //  Chapter 6 Research methods 


Questions 
Which of the following would produce qualitative data and which quantitative data? 
(1 mark each) 
1. 
Students rate their enjoyment of research methods on a scale of 1–10. 

2. 
An individual describes his experience of schizophrenia. 

3. 
A researcher asks passers-by their views on litter in the town centre (using a series of ‘yes’ and ‘no’ questions). 

4. 
Students give feedback on their teacher using a questionnaire made up of open questions. 

5. 
A researcher categorises the social behaviour of children into one of three types. 

6. 
Students record the number of hours they spend revising and the number of hours they spend on social network sites. 

7. 
A teacher interviews Year 10 students about their ideas of what psychology is. 

8. 
A girl writes a diary describing what daily life is like for a child. 



Evaluation 
Qualitative data 
Qualitative data off ers a researcher much more richness of detail than 
quantitative data. It is much broader in scope and gives the participant/ 
respondent the opportunity to more fully report their thoughts, feelings and 
opinions on a given subject. 
For this reason, qualitative data tends to have greater external validity than quantitative data; it provides the researcher with a more meaningful insight into the participant’s worldview. 
That said, qualitative data is oft en diffi  cult to analyse. It tends not to lend itself to being summarised statistically so that patterns and comparisons within and between data may be hard to identify. 
As a consequence, conclusions oft en rely on the subjective interpretations of the researcher and these may be subject to bias, particularly if the researcher has preconceptions about what he/she is expecting to fi nd. 
Quantitative data 
Essentially the evaluations of quantitative data are the opposite of those above – quantitative data is relatively simple to analyse, therefore comparisons between groups can be easily drawn. Also, data in numerical form tends to be more objective and less open to bias. On the other hand, quantitative data is much narrower in meaning and detail than qualitative data. It thus may fail to represent ‘real life’. 
Evaluation 
Primary data 
The main strength of primary data is that it fi ts the job. Primary data is authentic data obtained from the participants themselves for the purpose of a particular investigation. Questionnaires and interviews, for instance, can be designed in such a way that they specifi cally target the information that the researcher requires. 
To produce primary data, however, requires time and eff ort on the part of the researcher. Conducting an experiment, for instance, requires considerable planning, preparation and resources, and this is a limitation when compared with secondary data, which may be accessed within a matter of minutes. 
Secondary data 
In contrast to primary data above, secondary data may be inexpensive and easily accessed requiring minimal eff ort. When examining secondary data the researcher may fi nd that the desired information already exists and so there is no need to conduct primary data collection. 
The fl ip side is that there may be substantial variation in the quality and accuracy of secondary data. Information might at fi rst appear to be valuable and promising but, on further investigation, may be outdated or incomplete. The content of the data may not quite match the researcher’s needs or objectives. This may challenge the validity of any conclusions. 
What data? 
Questions 
Of the methods listed below, which would produce qualitative data and which quantitative? (1 mark each) 
1. 
An experiment. 

2. 
An interview. 

3. 
A questionnaire (mainly closed questions). 

4. 
A questionnaire (mainly open questions). 

5. 
A correlation.        

6. 
A structured observation. 

7. 
An unstructured observation. 


Meta-analysis 
A form of research method that uses secondary data is meta-analysis. This refers to a process in which a number of studies are identifi ed which have investigated the same aims/hypothesis. The results of these studies can be pooled together and a joint conclusion produced. In the case of experimental research, where the independent variable has been measured in the same way, it is possible to perform a statistical analysis and calculate an eff ect size – basically the dependent variable of a meta-analysis – which gives an overall statistical measure of diff erence or relationship between variables across a number of studies. 
On the plus side, meta-analysis allows us to create a larger, more varied sample and results can then be generalised across much larger populations, increasing validity. 
However, meta-analysis may be prone to publication bias, sometimes referred to as the fi le drawer problem. The researcher may not select all relevant studies, choosing to leave out those studies with negative or non­signifi cant results. Therefore the conclusions from the meta-analysis will be biased because they only represent some of the relevant data. 
Meta-analysis 
Questions 
1. 
Find an example of a meta-analysis within this book. (1 mark) 

2. 
Explain how this study was conducted. (3 marks) 

3. 
Was there an effect size? If so, what is it? (1 mark) 


Primary and secondary data 
Questions 
Which of the following would be classed as primary and which secondary data? (1 mark each) 
1. 
A researcher searches through newspapers to see if there is a relationship between daily temperature and the total number of violent incidents. 

2. 
An interview with people with obsessive-compulsive disorder about their experiences. 

3. 
An observation of how primary school children negotiate rules during a game of marbles. 

4. 
A comparison of crime statistics in inner city and rural areas to see if there is a difference. 

5. 
A researcher assesses how the GCSE results of schools in her local area compare with national averages. 

6. 
A lab study to see if men or women are more susceptible to visual illusions. 

7. 
A researcher examines the transcript of a trial to see if there were inconsistencies in eyewitness accounts. 

8. 
A researcher asks cinemagoers leaving a horror movie if they feel more murderous after seeing the ÿ lm. 


Check it 
1. 
Explain the difference between primary data and secondary data. [4 marks] 

2. 
Explain one strength and one limitation of qualitative data. [6 marks] 

3. 
Explain why a ‘meta-analysis’ is used in psychological research.  [3 marks] 


 Types of data // 193 
Measures of centraltendency and dispersion 



Drawing conclusions from a table of results 
The table below includes a summary of the results gained from an experiment. The experiment compared the number of words recalled when words were learned in silence compared to when words were learned whilst music was playing in the background. 
Table showing the means and standard deviations for the number of words recalled when learned in silence and when learned with music playing. 

Look carefully at the wording of the specifcation (at the top left of the facing page). This means you must know how to calculate the mean, median, mode or range (and can use a calculator for this). 
There is no requirement to calculate the standard deviation, though it will enhance your understanding if you play around with di°erent data sets and see how changing the numbers leads to di°erent standard deviations. You can do this on various online websites or use a spreadsheet (e.g. Excel) or a scientifc calculator. 


Presentation of quantitative data 
The specification says… 

Presentation and display of quantitative data: graphs, tables, scattergrams, bar charts, histograms. 
Distributions: normal and skewed distributions; characteristics of normal and skewed distributions. 

On this spread, we continue our discussion of descriptive statistics and look at some of the ways in which data can be presented and how it may be distributed. 
Key terms 

Scattergram˜A type of graph that represents the strength and direction of the relationship between co-variables in a correlational analysis. 
Bar chart˜A type of graph in which the frequency of each variable is represented by the height of the bars. 
Histogram˜A type of graph which shows frequency but, unlike a bar chart, the area of the bars (not just the height) represents frequency. The x-axis must start at a true zero and the scale is continuous. 
Bar chart showing the mean number Histogram showing percentage scores of words spoken in ÿve minutes for in a maths test. the SpeedUpp condition and the water condition. 25­

150 
Mean number of words spoken 
0 

SpeedUpp Water 
100 
50 

Study tip 
When presenting a table or graph, always have a title and clearly label columns or axes. 





Mathematical content 
The specification says… 
There is a list of the required 
mathematical skills on page 217. 
On this spread, we cover some of the mathematical skills identif ed in the specif cation. No – don’t run away! Many of you may be concerned about the maths content in psychology – some of you may be excited! For the worried ones, rest assured that we have already covered, on other spreads, a number of the mathematical skills. These include working out the mean, median and mode, drawing conclusions from tables and graphs, recognising di. erent forms of data, etc. 
Here we cover much more, so, take a deep breath – there’s nothing to be scared of… 
Maths. Offi cially not as scary as being chased by an alligator. 
Estimate results 
It may be necessary to comment on the average or dispersion of a set of data, which may require estimating the answer. 
The most words spoken in the SpeedUpp condition was 206 and the lowest was 59 (this data is at the bottom of page 194). 
What would you estimate the range would be? (Use rounded ÿ gures such as 200 – 60.) See answer on facing page. 
Question 
Now do the same for the water condition. (1 mark) (Data also in table at bottom of page 194.) 
Mathematical content 
Percentages 
With reference to the raw data at the bottom of page 194, what percentage of participants spoke more words in the SpeedUpp condition than the water condition? 
There were 6 participants whose word score was higher for the SpeedUpp condition than the 
water condition out of a total of 10 participants. 
To calculate the percentage we use the following formula: 
Number participants who spoke more aft er SpeedUpp 6 × 100 =     × 100 = 60% Total number of participants 10 
Converting a percentage to a decimal 
To convert a percentage to a decimal, remove the % sign and move the decimal point two places to the left . For example: 
37% is 37.0 then move the decimal point two places to left = 0.37 
So, for the percentage of participants who spoke more words in the SpeedUpp condition: 
60% is 60.0, move the decimal point two places to the left = 0.60 (0.6). 
Decimal places 
The term decimal places refers to the number of digits to the right of the decimal point. 
Converting a decimal to a fraction 
Start by working out the number of decimal places in your number. For example, 0.81 has two decimal places (two digits aft er the decimal point) and 0.275 has three decimal places. 
If there are two decimal places then you divide by 100, if there are three decimal places you divide by 1,000. The number of decimal places equals the number of zeros. 
The fractions you get are 81/100 and 275/1000 
Sometimes you can reduce the fraction by fi nding the highest common factor, the biggest number that divides evenly into both parts of the fraction. 
In the case of 275/1000 you can divide both by 25 and get 11/40 
In the energy drink experiment, 0.6 of the total group spoke more words in the SpeedUpp 
condition. There is only one decimal place here, so we divide by 10. The fraction is 6/10. 
The biggest number that will divide into both parts of the fraction is 2 therefore, aft er dividing 
both parts of the fraction by 2, we are left  with 3/5 (or three-fi ft hs). 
Ratios 
We can also express the information above as a ratio. Considering the SpeedUpp example, we could calculate a part-to-whole ratio, that is, the ratio of the number of participants who spoke more words in the SpeedUpp condition (6) to the total number of participants (10) = 6:10 (which can be reduced to 3:5). 
This could also be written as a part-to-part ratio. The number of participants who spoke more words in the SpeedUpp condition (6) to the number of participants who spoke more words in the water condition (4) = 6:4 (which can be reduced to 3:2). 
Ratios should always be reduced as with a fraction, by fi nding the highest common factor. 
Estimates 
These are discussed in the Apply it on the left , and aim to produce ballpark fi gures (e.g. 10,000 instead of 9,569). Such estimates can be used to provide a broad idea of what the results of a calculation will be, for example if I want to subtract 5,492 from 9,569 I can estimate this as 10,000 less 5,000. 
Percentages, decimals, fractions, ratios 
Task: 
For further practice, why not work through all the calculations in the spoke more words in the water condition. Make sure you always show main text (above), this time using the number of participants who all your workings for any calculation so your teacher can assess the method(s) you used. 

Statistical testing: The sign test 
The specification says… 

Introduction to statistical testing; the sign test. When to use the sign test; calculation of the sign test. 
Our fnal mathematical challenge is an overview of the processes involved in statistical testing including the concepts of probability and signifcance. 
Then we see how these ideas are applied to the calculation of a simple statistical test: the sign test. 
Key terms 

Statistical testing˜Provides a way of determining whether hypotheses should be accepted or rejected. By using a statistical test we can fnd out whether di.erences or relationships between variables are signifcant (meaningful) or are likely to have occurred by chance. 
Sign test˜A statistical test used to analyse the di.erence in scores between related items (e.g. the same participant tested twice). Data should be nominal or better. 
When expressing the 5% probability level (described on the right), students will often not include the appropriate number of decimal places. Remember that 5% is not equivalent to 0.5 (this is 50%) but should be wri°en as 0.05. 
Be careful, this is an easy mistake to make! 
Table of critical values of the sign test (S) 
Level of significance for a one-tailed test  0.05  0.025  0.01  0.005  
Level of significance for a two-tailed test  0.10  0.05  0.02  0.01  
N = 5  0  
6  0  0  
7  0  0  0  
8  1  0  0  0  
9  1  1  0  0  
10  1  1  0  0  
11  2  1  1  0  
12  2  2  1  1  
13  3  2  1  1  
14  3  2  2  1  
15  3  3  2  2  
16  4  3  2  2  
17  4  4  3  2  
18  5  4  3  3  
19  5  4  4  3  
20  5  5  4  3  
25  7  7  6  5  
30  10  9  8  7  
35  12  11  10  9  



Calculated value of S must be EQUAL TO or LESS THAN the critical value in this table for significance to be shown. 
























the purpose of this example, 10 participants have been added), to make 20 participants in total. 
Step 1 We need to convert the data to nominal data by working out which participants produced a higher word count after the energy drink, and which produced a lower word count. 
We do this by subtracting the score for water from the score for SpeedUpp. If the answer is negative we record a negative sign, if the answer is positive we record a plus sign. 
Participant  SpeedUpp  Water  Sign of difference  
1  110  122  –  
2  59  45  +  
3  206  135  +  
4  89  90  –  
5  76  42  +  
6  141  87  +  
7  152  131  +  
8  98  113  –  
9  198  129  +  
10  57  62  –  
11  267  176  +  
12  282  240  +  
13  134  157  –  
14  167  103  +  
15  88  108  –  
16  201  121  +  
17  267  231  +  
18  322  200  +  
19  249  207  +  
20  90  104  –  

Step 2 From the table we add up the pluses and the minuses. The total number of pluses 
(13) is the number of participants who spoke more words in the five minutes after drinking SpeedUpp than they did after drinking water. The total number of minuses (7) is the number of participants who spoke more words in the five minutes after drinking water than they did after drinking SpeedUpp. 
Step 3 We take the less frequent sign (in this case it is the total number of minuses) and call this S. Therefore S = 7 (this is our calculated value of S). 
Note that if there had been any participants who spoke the same number of words in both conditions (Participant 4 got pretty close!) this data would be ignored and the total number 
(N) would be adjusted. 
Step 4 Now we must compare our calculated value with the critical value (see facing page, far left). 
The hypothesis was: Participants speak significantly more words in the five minutes after drinking SpeedUpp than in the five minutes after drinking water. 
The hypothesis is directional, so we are looking for a one-tailed test. 
The sign test: over to you 
A teacher wanted to know whether his psychology students thought they had beneÿtted from reading a chapter on research methods he had produced in a textbook. 
After 15 of the teacher’s students had read the chapter, they simply had to indicate whether they thought their understanding of research methods was better (+), worse (-) or had stayed the same (=). 
The results of the investigation were as follows: 
Student  Better  Worse  Same  
1  +  
2  =  
3  -  
4  +  
5  +  
6  +  
7  -  
8  -  
9  =  
10  +  
11  -  
12  +  
13  +  
14  -  
15  =  

At the beginning of the investigation, the teacher wrote a directional (one-tailed) hypothesis stating that the students’ understanding of research methods would be improved after reading the chapter. 
Questions 
1. 
Using the critical values table on the facing page, decide whether the result of the teacher’s investigation is signiÿcant or not. (1 mark) 

2. 
Explain how you arrived at your answer. (2 marks) 




Peer review and psychological research 
and the economy 
The specification says… 
The role of peer review in the scientific process. 
The implications of psychological research for the economy. 

This spread has a dual purpose: frst, we investigate and evaluate the role that peer review plays in the scientifc process. 
Second, we discuss some of the ways in which psychological research may impact upon, and be of beneft to, the economy. 
Key terms 

Peer review˜The assessment of scientifc work by others who are specialists in the same feld, to ensure that any research intended for publication is of high quality. 
Economy˜The state of a country or region in terms of the production and consumption of goods and services. 


Fraudulent research 
In 2011, an intriguing Dutch study reported that when there’s a lot of rubbish in the street we are more likely to stereotype other people. 
The following year it was revealed that the co-author, 
Diederik Stapel, had made up the data. It turned out that Stapel had been manipulating and fabricating data for a number of years and he was forced to return his PhD qualiÿcation. 
Questions 
1. 
Fraud in psychological research is not unheard of. Do some research of your own and try to ÿnd two other examples of fraudulent research in psychology. (4 marks) 

2. 
Explain how the process of peer review is an attempt to guard against fraud in psychology. (3 marks) 



Implications of psychological research for the economy 
One of the wider concerns for psychology, as well as science in general, is what the implications of research are for the economy. By ‘implications’ we mean – how does what we learn from the fi ndings of psychological research infl uence, aff ect, benefi t or devalue our fi nancial prosperity? 
We will revisit two examples of research discussed elsewhere in this book, the fi ndings of which have implications for the nation’s fi nancial well-being. 
Attachment research into the role of the father 
Attachment research has come a considerable way since John Bowlby fi rst asserted that a child can only ever form a secure and lasting monotropic bond with its mother (see page 84). Thus, at the time Bowlby was writing, childcare was seen as a mother’s responsibility, and hers alone, whilst the father was free to carry out his ‘natural’ role as provider for the family. 
More recent research suggests that the father may fulfi l a qualitatively diff erent role from the mother. Crucially, this role is no less valuable in the child’s upbringing. 
Psychological research has shown that both parents are equally capable of providing the emotional support necessary for healthy psychological development, and this understanding may promote more fl exible working arrangements within the family. It is now the norm in lots of households that the mother is the higher earner and so works longer hours, whilst many couples share childcare responsibilities across the working week. This means that modern parents are better equipped to maximise their income and contribute more eff ectively to the economy. 
The development of treatments for mental disorders 
Absence from work costs the economy an estimated £15 billion a year. A recent government report revealed that a third of all absences are caused by mild to moderate mental health disorders such as depression, anxiety and stress (The Telegraph 2014). Psychological research into the causes and treatments of mental disorders therefore has an important role to play in supporting a healthy workforce. 
In Chapter 5 we looked at treatment of mental disorders. Patients are able to be assessed quickly and gain swift  access to treatment. Many conditions are treated through the use of psychotherapeutic drugs such as SSRIs for depression and OCD (see page 156). Antianxiety drugs are used for stress conditions. 
Referrals can also be made by GPs for psychotherapies such as systematic desensitisation (see page 148) or CBT (see page 152). Individuals can also engage in self-treatment using similar methods. 
This means that, in many cases, people with mental disorders are able to manage their condition eff ectively and return to work. Thus, the economic benefi t of psychological research into disorders such as depression is considerable. 
Psychological research boosting the economy. 
The Nudge Unit 
In our Introduction to this book we described the Nudge Unit (see page 13). The ‘Nudge Unit’ is the name given to the Behavioural Insights Team, an organisation that used to be part of the UK government. It was formed to change behaviour using psychological principles (in small steps, or ‘nudges’). 
The work of the Nudge Unit has been wide-ranging (and controversial) but much of it has focused on gains for the economy and preventing ÿ nancial waste. 
Questions 
1. 
Do some research and ÿ nd three policies the Nudge Unit has introduced. How successful have they been in saving money for the economy? (6 marks) 

2. 
Do you have any (ethical or moral) concerns with the use of psychological research to in° uence people’s behaviour? (4 marks) 


Psychological research and the economy 
On the left we have described two examples of psychological research that may have implications for the economy but can you ÿ nd any other similar examples elsewhere in this book? 
Questions 
1. 
How might research into eyewitness testimony and the cognitive interview (see pages 58 and 62) lead to economic beneÿ ts in the long run? (2 marks each) 

2. 
How might research into the processes that in° uence social change beneÿ t the economy (page 34)? (2 marks) 


Check it 
1. Explain how the peer review process is 
Research into 
conducted. [2 marks]
psychological 
2. Explain two roles of peer review in the 
conditions such 
scientiÿ c process. [4 marks]
as depression may benefi t the 
3. Brie° y discuss the implications of psychological research for the economy. [6 marks]
economy. 
 Peer review and psychological research  and the economy // 203 
Practical corner 






















1. In Table 2, what percentage of participants scored 10 or above on the ESP test and the extraversion scale? (2 marks) 
2. 
Which graphical display would be most suitable to show the relationship between ESP score and extraversion score in Table 2? Explain your answer. (2 marks) 

3. 
Sketch a suitable graphical display to show the relationship between ESP score and extraversion score in Table 2. (3 marks) 

4. 
Referring to Table 2 and the display you have drawn, explain the relationship between ESP scores and extraversion scores in this investigation. (2 marks) 

5. 
Explain why, from this investigation, it is not possible to conclude that there is a causal relationship between ESP score and extraversion. (1 mark) 

6. 
The chance probability score on a set of 25 Zener cards is 1 in 5. Express this ÿgure as a decimal. (1 mark) 



Here s one we did before ... 
Table 2 ESP score and extraversion score for each participant. 







 Practical corner // 205 
Revision summaries 


Types of experiment 
Lab experiments 
IV is manipulated in a controlled setting. Participants go to researcher. 
Field experiments 
IV is manipulated in a natural setting. Researcher goes to participants. 
Natural experiments 
IV changes naturally. DV/setting may be natural or in a lab. 
Quasi-experiments 
IV based on an existing difference between people, effect on DV is recorded. 
Evaluation 
Lab experiments 
High internal validity (control CVs/EVs, cause and effect shown), replication more possible (support for findings). However low external validity (generalisability, mundane realism), low internal validity (demand characteristics). 
Field experiments 
Higher external validity (more authentic, realism). Lower internal validity (less control). Ethical issues (consent not possible). 
Natural experiments 
Only option for practical/ethical reasons, high external validity (real-world problems). Limited opportunities, no random allocation (CVs), low realism in a lab, no manipulation of IV (can’t claim cause and effect). 
Quasi-experiments 
If in a lab, issues as for lab experiment. No random allocation, no manipulation of IV (can’t claim cause and effect). 

Experimental method 
Aims 
Purpose of the investigation. 
Hypotheses 
Testable, operationalised statement. 
Directional or non-directional 
Identifying a difference/ correlation or not. Choice depends on previous theory/ research. 
Variables 
IVs and DVs 
IV manipulated, DV measured. 
Levels of the IV 
Experimental and control conditions. 
Operationalisation 
Defining variables so they can be measured. 

Research issues Experimental designs 
Extraneous variables Independent groups 
Nuisance variables but Participants in each condition of randomly distributed. experiment are different. 
Confounding variables Repeated measures 
Vary systematically with IV. All participants take part in all conditions. 
Demand characteristics Participants second guess Matched pairs 
the aims, alter their Similar participants paired on behaviour. participant variables, allocated to condition A or B. 
Investigator e.ects 
Influence of researcher on DV/design decisions. Evaluation 
Randomisation Independent groups 
Chance methods to reduce Participant variables not controlled researcher’s bias. (use random allocation). 
Less economical. No order effects. 
Standardisation 
Ensuring all participants Repeated measures 
have the same experience. Order effects (use counterbalancing). Demand characteristics. Participant variables controlled. More economical. 
Matched pairs 
No order effects. Cannot match participants exactly. Time-consuming. 
Research techniques 
Pilot studies 
Check procedures and techniques, make changes. 
Single-blind 
Participants aren’t aware of aims/conditions until end. 
Double-blind 
Neither participants nor individual conducting research know the aim/condition. 

Types of observation 
Naturalistic observations 
Behaviour observed where it would normally occur. No control over variables. 
Controlled observations 
Some control over environment, e.g. manipulation of variables. 
Covert and overt observations 
Observing without or with participants’ knowledge. 
Participant and non-participant 
Join the group or remain an outsider. 
Evaluation 
All observations 
Capture what people do. Observer bias and no causal relationships shown. 
Naturalistic observations 
Low internal validity (control di.cult). High external validity (everyday life). 
Controlled observations 
High internal validity – extraneous variables may be controlled. Low external validity (except if covert). 
Covert and overt observations 
Covert – low demand characteristics but ethically questionable. Overt – behaviour may be affected. 
Participant and non-participant 
Observational design 
Ways of recording data 
Record everything (unstructured) or categories (structured). 
Behavioural categories 
Target behaviours broken down into observable components. 
Sampling methods 
Continuous. Event sampling: count events. Time sampling: count at timed intervals. 
Evaluation 
Structured versus unstructured 
Structured – numerical, easier to analyse. Unstructured – may just be eye-catching information, qualitative data harder to analyse. Observer bias. 
Behavioural categories 
Must be observable. Avoid dustbin category. No overlap. 
Sampling methods 
Event – useful for infrequent behaviour, 

Control groups and conditions Participant – increased external validity misses complexity. Used as a comparison or baseline. but may lose objectivity. Time – less effort but Non-participant – more objectivity may not represent whole (increased internal validity), less insight. behaviour. 



Questionnaires Interviews Designing self-report 
The method 
Questionnaires Structured interviews Questionnaires Types of correlation 
Pre-set list. Can use to measure DV Pre-set questions, fixed order, face-to-face. Likert scale, rating scale, fixed choice. Positive, negative and zero. in experiments. Unstructured interviews Interviews Di.erence between correlations and Closed and open questions No formula, just general topic. Standardised schedule, avoids interviewer experiments Fixed-choice or not. Quantitative Questions based on responses. bias. Comfortable setting for rapport. No manipulation of variables, no data or not. 
Ethical issues. cause and effect. 
Semi-structured interviews 
Some pre-set questions with follow-ups. 
Good questions Evaluation Evaluation 
Questionnaires Evaluation Overuse of jargon Strengths 
Don’t be too technical. 
Distribute to many people. 
Useful starting point. Quick and 
Structured interviews 
Fixed-choice, easy to analyse. 
economical, using secondary data. 
Emotive language and leading questions 
Easy to replicate. Interviewer can’t elaborate/explain. 
Social desirability response bias. 
Replace ‘loaded’ phrases with neutral ones. Limitations Unstructured interviews 
Closed and open questions 
Can’t demonstrate cause and effect. 
Double-barrelled questions and double 
Flexible. Increased interviewer bias. Analysis more Quantitative or qualitative data, Intervening variables. May be di.cult. Social desirability bias reduced by rapport. negatives affects ease of analysis. 
misinterpreted. 
Ask one question only. 



Qualitative and Primary and Meta-Measures of Measures of Presentation of quantitative data secondary data analysis central tendency dispersion quantitative data 
Qualitative data Primary data Type of Mean Range Tables Written, non-numerical Collected firsthand for secondary data Add up, divide by the number. Subtract the lowest Raw scores summarised in a grid. description of participants’ purpose of investigation. Statistical 
from the highest 
Median Bar charts 
thoughts, feelings etc. 
(add 1).
analysis of 
Secondary data 
The middle value. 
Discrete categorical data. Frequency large number 
Standard deviation = height of bar. 
Quantitative data Collected by someone of studies. 
Mode
Expressed numerically other than researcher. 
How much scores Produces effect 
Histograms 
Most frequently occurring. 
rather than words. 
(on average) size. 
Continuous data rather than discrete, deviate from mean. 
Evaluation 
so no space between bars. True zero. 
Evaluation 
Evaluation Evaluation 
Primary data 
Evaluation Scattergrams Qualitative data Fits the job, targets Large sample, Mean 
Shows strength and direction of Most sensitive and representative. RangeRich in detail. Greater relevant information. 
relationship between co-variables. 
high validity. 
Easily distorted by extreme values. 
Easy to calculate. 
external validity. Di.cult to Requires time. 
Publication 
Normal distribution 
Unrepresentative if analyse. May be subjective. 
bias/file drawer Median
Secondary data 
there are extremes. Bell curve. Mean, median and mode 
problem. Less affected by extremes but not 
Quantitative data Inexpensive and easy to 
at same point. Tails never touch zero. Easy to analyse (e.g. access. Variation in the sensitive. Standard deviation 
Skewed distributions 
More precise than Narrower in meaning. 
graphs). Less biased. quality, e.g. outdated. 
Mode range. Distorted by Negative leans right. Positive leans 
Relevant to categorical data. 
extreme values. 
Crude, unrepresentative. 
If S = critical value, the difference is significant.
 Revision summaries // 207 


.eftl 
Practice questions, answers and feedback 
Question 1 A teacher was interested to know whether there was a gender difference in the time spent doing homework between students at his school. The teacher selected a random sample of 20 boys and 20 girls from the whole school and got them to record the time (in minutes) they spent doing homework at the end of each day. After four weeks the teacher compared the total time for boys and girls and found there was very little difference in the time boys and girls spent doing homework. 
(a) This is an example of a quasi-experiment. Explain why this is a quasi-experiment. (2 marks) 
Morticia’s answer does not distinguish a quasi-experiment, many quasi-experiments are actually done in labs. 
Luke gives half a good answer but the ‘variables were natural’ is too vague for more than a basic answer.

Vladimir’s answer Participants were not randomly allocated to conditions 
Helpfully, Vladimir supplies the missing element to Luke’s answer! This is 
and the independent variable was pre-existing categories (gender), not something manipulated. 
clear and accurate with a relevant link to the study described. 
(b) Explain one limitation of a quasi-experiment. Refer to the experiment above in your answer. (3 marks) 
Morticia’s answer could be made into a relevant limitation that applies to this study but is too poorly expressed for any value.

Luke’s answer One limitation of quasi-experiments is that there may be 
This is a good answer from Luke. The limitation is brief but clearly stated 
confounding variables because we can’t randomly allocate the participants 
and explained in the context of the investigation described in the stem.
to conditions, for example it might be that girls were smarter and that’s why they spent more time on homework. 
Vladimir’s answer is focused on the stem and is plausible but is not really 
a limitation of quasi-experiments as much as experiments in general so 
Vladimir’s answer In this example a limitation would be that the girls and 
only some value in this answer. 
boys were aware of what the teacher was investigating and shaped their 
answer to suit the aims. 
(c) The teacher used random sampling to select participants. Explain how the teacher may have used random sampling in this experiment. (2 marks) 
It’s not clear who ‘they’ are in Morticia’s answer and reference to the 
lottery method alone is not sufficient. Little of merit here.

Luke’s is a better answer – there is some application to the stem – but the 
Luke’s answer First you get a list of everyone in the school, then you put all 
girls and boys would be selected separately (as described below). This is a reasonable response.
the names in a large bowl and select 20 girls and 20 boys. 
Vladimir’s answer If you first divide the list of everyone in the school into girls’ names and boys’ names and number every name you can then use a 
An excellent answer from Vladimir that is clearly focused on the stem and 
recognises the importance of the girls and boys as separate groups. 
computer randomiser to select 20 of each. 
(d) Before the experiment began, the teacher conducted a pilot study. Explain one reason why the teacher decided to conduct a pilot study. (2 marks)
Morticia makes a common error – pilot studies do not test hypotheses, 
Morticia’s answer The teacher would do this because he wants to see if his 
they ‘road-test’ procedures and materials.
hypothesis is right and not waste time on the real study if it isn’t. 
Luke’s answer reads more like a definition of a pilot study rather than a 
Luke’s answer A pilot study is a small-scale trial run of the study itself 
reason to conduct it. There is reference to testing procedures though, so there is something of value here. 
where you can test procedures and see if there are any problems. 

Quite a weak, generic answer but Vladimir has cited a reason why pilot studies are conducted and thus the answer has some value but not perfect. 
On this spread we look at some typical student answers to questions. The comments provided indicate what is good and bad in each answer. Learning how to produce effective question answers is a SKILL. Read pages 213 223 for guidance. 
Question 2 Following the experiment described on the facing page, the teacher selected a smaller sample of girls and boys from the original study to take part in an interview. The interview was made up of a list of pre-set questions that the teacher read out to the students one after the other. The topic was whether students felt they received too much homework, too little, or the right amount. 
(a) Identify the type of interview the teacher conducted. Justify your answer. (2 marks) 
 Morticia’s answer It’s a structured interview because there were pre-set questions.  Morticia has given the bare minimum but enough! The correct interview is identified and there is application, albeit brief. Luke has identified the type correctly but the application to this context is too minimal. Vladmir’s answer is short but accurate. 
 Luke’s answer It’s structured rather than unstructured which suits this task. 
 Vladimir’s answer The questions were fixed in advance and therefore it is called a structured interview.  

(b) Write one closed question that the teacher could have asked as part of the interview. (1 mark)  
Morticia’s answer Why is homework important?  Morticia’s example is not a closed question as it would not restrict the respondent to a fixed range of answers, so no good. In Luke’s example the choice is restricted, so spot on. Vladmir’s question has a fixed range of answers (between 1 and 7) so it is also fine.  
Luke’s answer Do you mind doing homework – yes or no?  
Vladimir’s answer How many nights a week do you do homework?  

(c) Explain one limitation of interviews in the context of this study. (3 marks)  
Morticia’s answer It may be difficult to analyse the answers if there are a lot of open questions. This is a limitation.  A relevant limitation is identified here but not developed further, a weak answer. Luke’s answer is entirely focused on the context of the study and is well elaborated, a perfect answer. Unfortunately Vladimir has given a strength of structured interviews rather than a limitation.  
Luke’s answer Since the topic is homework it might be better to adapt the questions as you go along to get more information from the students instead of having fixed questions. Further questions depend on how much homework they actually get and how much they do.  
Vladimir’s answer Structured interviews ensure that different interviewers don’t behave differently.  

 Practice questions, answers and feedback // 209 
’ ‘’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
 Multiple-choice questions // 211 

Appendix: A level and AS skills 
On the following spreads we look at how short-
Question styles 
answer questions and essay questions can be 
At both A level and AS you may have multiple-choice, short-answer and/or extended writing/essay answered and 
questions. How do you know how to answer these? There are clues: how they may be 
• 
The command word (see list on right). 

• 
The number of marks. 

• 
Extra information in the question. 


Command 







words 



The following command words are used in exam questions. The deÿnitions given here are from AQA (see tinyurl.com/yx7jqjy5). 

Analyse  Separate information into components and  
identify their characteristics.°  
Calculate  Work out the value of something.°  
Choose  Select from a range of alternatives.  
Comment  Present an informed opinion.  
Compare  Identify similarities and/or di.erences.  
Complete  Finish a task by adding to given  
information.°  
Consider  Review and respond to given information.  
Describe  Give an account of.  
Design  Set out how something will be done.  
Discuss  Present key points about di.erent ideas or  
strengths and weaknesses of an idea.  
Distinguish  Explain ways in which two things di.er.  
Provide detail of characteristics that enable  
a person to know the di.erence between ...  
Draw  Produce a diagram.  
Evaluate  Judge from available evidence.  
Explain  Set out purposes or reasons.  
Explain how  Give a detailed account of a process or way  
of doing something.  
Explain why  Give a detailed account of reasons in  
relation to a particular situation.  
Give  Produce an answer from recall or from given  
information.°  
Identify  Name or otherwise characterise.  
Justify  Provide reasons, reasoned argument to  
support, possibly provide evidence. °  
Label  Provide appropriate names on a diagram.°  
Name  Identify using a recognised technical term.  
Outline  Set out main characteristics.  
Select  Choose or pick out from alternatives.°  
State  Express in clear terms.  
Suggest  Present a possible case/solution.  

What is meant by Give a deÿnition. 
Which is Select from alternatives. Write Provide information in verbatim form. 
 Question styles // 213 
Understanding description (AO1) 
There are three main skills that you need to develop: 
• 
Description of psychological knowledge, assessment objective 1 – aka AO1. 

• 
Application of psychological knowledge (AO2). 

• 
Evaluation of psychological knowledge (AO3). 


When we say ‘psychological knowledge’ we are referring to the concepts, research studies, therapies and theories/explanations used and developed by psychologists. 
This spread starts by looking at description skills. What is it you have to do when you describe something? 
Think of describing an orange. You might say – it is round and orange – which is true but that is a rather limited description. 
A better description would include more detail – The skin is a little squishy and pockmarked. The remains of the green stalk are set in a dimple. 

To produce good descriptions you need to grasp this concept of detail. 

On the AS exam there are 72 marks for each paper and you have 90 minutes. 
On A level exams, there are 96 marks for each paper 
That means you have 1 ¼ minutes per mark. This gives you a sense of how much time you should spend on each exam question. 
Don’t forget that this timing is not just about writing but you should spend time thinking too. 
214 // A level and AS skills 


Every time you make a point, 
make sure you also explain it. 
The second answer is more detailed but not much longer. 

What is 



organisation






? 

You know what an organised bedroom looks like. No doubt some of you do not have very organised bedrooms and o.en have to search high and low to ÿnd things. Teachers reading student answers o.en feel like this. 
Put the information in your answer so that each point follows the previous one in a systematic way rather than just dumping everything you know onto the page – a teacher can see the mess.  
In longer answer questions it is important to have a plan and a structure (see page 222–223). 

What is 



clarity


 and 


coherence



? 
One of the major issues for people who read what you write is that it doesn’t always make sense. Lack of clarity is when you don’t quite understand what the person is trying to say. 
One useful way to ensure clarity (and coherence) is to always try to explain what you have just written, for example: 
Internalisation is when a person changes their private as well as 
public opinions. In other words they actually believe the views they 
are expressing. 

What is 



specialist terminology








? 
This is linked to ‘detail’ 
– using psychologists’ specialist terms provides speciÿc information for your answers. 
What are these specialist terms? They are the vocabulary used by psychologists for their concepts and theories, such as the term identiÿcation. 
Specialist terms may be words that are used in ordinary English 
– but they have been given a speciÿc meaning in psychology – like identiÿcation. 
Or they may be terms that are new to you, such as normative or nAÿ  liator. Get used to using these. 



If asked to ‘Describe research related to conformity’ then you can either describe research studies or concepts or theories. 
Concepts and theories are derived from the research process and therefore constitute research. 
 Understanding description (AO1) // 215 
Understanding application (AO2) 
We will now move on to the second skill – application. 
The trick of the application questions is that you are required to apply what you have learned about psychological concepts, studies and theories – to a scenario. Imagine the following scenario … 
… it is a dark night, a thin sliver of moon and ink black clouds, the wind is starting to get stronger. You walk home down a street with no lights and suddenly … 
A scenario is a scene – it is context. You now have a chance to put your psychology into action. This kind of question is intended to be something that tests your real understanding of psychology. 
You should become brilliant at this because we have supplied lots and lots of practice throughout this book. 
In Chapter 2 we discuss eyewitness testimony. 
Each year a small village holds a cycling event which attracts hundreds of cyclists and also hundreds of people come to watch the event. This spring at the event there was an accident where one of the race leaders seemed to collide with another cyclist and ended up in the crowd, to the horror of the onlookers. A number of people were seriously injured. Police interviewed eyewitnesses to see what might have caused the accident. 
Explain how anxiety may affect the eyewitnesses’ memory of what happened. (6 marks) 
The description of the event is the ‘scenario’ (also sometimes referred to as the ‘stem’). It provides a context for you to answer the question. When doing this you must include: 
1. 
CONCEPT You must describe how anxiety affects eyewitness testimony. 

2. 
CONTEXT You must relate your description to the speciÿ c issue of how anxiety might affect the recall of the events described here. 


Some scenarios (and questions) are shorter. For example, in Chapter 5 we discussed phobias. 
Tomas has a phobia of cats. Outline how Tomas’s phobia of cats could be treated using systematic desensitisation. (3 marks) 
1. 
CONTEXT You must focus on treating a phobia of cats. 

2. 
CONCEPT You must describe how systematic desensitisation is done. 


AO2 Mark scheme 
These are the levels that may be used when marking an application question. Identify the key descriptors. 
Level Marks Description 
Knowledge related to psychological topic is clear and generally well-detailed. Application is mostly clear 
3 
5–6 and effective. The answer is generally coherent with appropriate use of terminology. 
Knowledge is evident. Application is appropriate 2 
3–4 but not explained. The answer lacks clarity in places. 
Terminology is used appropriately on occasions. Knowledge is limited. Application is either absent or inappropriate. The answer as a whole lacks clarity 
1 
1–2 and has inaccuracies. Terminology is either absent or inappropriately used. 
0 No relevant content 
The mark scheme is presented as an illustration of the AQA mark scheme. Always check the AQA website for the latest version of mark schemes as these may have been amended. 
Wrong sort of dark night! A different scenario altogether … 
About 25% of your exam questions will assess skills in relation to research methods. These questions are mainly application questions that begin with a scenario as shown below: 
A psychologist wanted to investigate the memory of older and 
younger children. He tested memory by giving the children a list 
of 50 words to memorise. 
1. 
Explain why this study would be considered to be a quasi-experiment. (2 marks) 

2. 
Write a suitable hypothesis for this study. (2 marks) 

3. 
The research found that the mean score for older children was 20.3 and for younger children was 15.7. What would you conclude from this? (1 mark) 

4. 
The mean scores are given to 1 decimal place. Explain what this means. (1 mark) 


The description of the research study is the scenario. It again provides the context for your answer. 
For example, when studying research methods you will learn about quasi-experiments. You now use that knowledge in the context of this research study. 
In the case of question 1 above this is likely to be marked as: 
• 
1 mark for explanation of the concept. 

• 
2 marks for an explanation of the concept plus content related to the stem.  


There are marked examples on pages 208–9. 
Remember: 
Concept Context 
or 
Context Concept 

A minimum of 10% of marks across the whole qualiÿcation will involve mathematical content. (This content is listed on the right.) This 10% is included in the total 25% (or more) for research methods questions. 
Some of the mathematical content requires the use of a calculator, which is allowed in the exam. In the speciÿcation it states that calculations of the mean, median, mode and range may be required, as well as percentages, fractions and ratios. You may also be asked to apply the sign test to a set of data and calculate the statistic. 
Content in the table on the right that is shaded in grey is A level only but it is covered in this Year 1 book. 


Mathematical concepts  Tick here when you are con.dent you understand this concept.  
Arithmeticand numericalcomputation Recognise and use expressions in decimal and standard form.  
Use ratios, fractions and percentages.  
Estimate results.  
Handling data Use an appropriate number of signi.cant .gures.  
Find arithmetic means.  
Construct and interpret frequency tables and diagrams, bar charts and histograms.  
Understand simple probability.  
Understand the principles of sampling as applied to scienti.c data.  
Understand the terms mean, median and mode.  
Use a scattergram to identify a correlation between two variables.  
Use a statistical test.  
Make order of magnitude calculations.  
Distinguish between levels of measurement.  
Know the characteristics of normal and skewed distributions.  
Select an appropriate statistical test.  
Use statistical tables to determine signi.cance.  
Understand measures of dispersion, including standard deviation and range.  
Understand the differences between qualitative and quantitative data.  
Understand the difference between primary and secondary data.  
Algebra Understand and use the symbols: = < << >> > . ˜  
Substitute numerical values into algebraic equations using appropriate units for physical quantities.  
Solve simple algebraic equations.  
Graphs Translate information between graphical, numerical and algebraic forms.  
Plot two variables from experimental or other data.  

 Understanding application (AO2) // 217 
Understanding evaluation (AO3) 
AO3 is a bit more than evaluation. It also means to  
We ÿnally move onto the third skill – evaluation.  analyse and interpret. To analyse an orange you  
What is it you have to do when you evaluate something?  might consider what it is made of.  
Think of the orange again (picture on right to help you). How can you evaluate an  
orange? Most people are puzzled by such a question.  
Evaluation means ‘consider its value’ (eVALUatE). No, the answer is not 30 p.  
You might say – it is great to take an orange in your bag for lunch because it doesn’t  
get damaged.  
That’s an advantage/strength of an orange.  
You might also say – I don’t like to eat oranges because my hands get all sticky.  
That’s a disadvantage/limitation of an orange.  
You could elaborate your answer by making a comparison – I don’t like oranges  
because my hands get all sticky whereas they don’t get so sticky with a banana.  
Understanding elaboration is what it is all about.  
 
Beginner level evaluation: State the point  

There are many di.erent kinds of evaluation, as you will discover in this book. For example, research support for a theory is a strength whereas lack of research support is a limitation. High validity is a strength and low validity is a limitation. 
To evaluate a concept, study or theory you might say: You have identiÿed the evaluation, which is a beginning! Some students don’t ever get much beyond this – and have to rely on their 
This concept is supported by research. 
AO1 marks. 
This study has been supported by other studies. 
It’s too easy just to state these rather generic evaluations, i.e. 
This study was well-controlled. 
comments that can be used anywhere. But it is a beginning. So 
This study had a limited sample. 
don’t feel too bad if that is all you can do for a while. 
This theory lacks validity. 

The next step is to make your evaluation relevant to the particular concept/study/theory. You need to say something to make your evaluation unique rather than generic. 
For example: Look at the evaluation below – it may look good but it is still generic 
(and therefore not worth much): 
• This concept is supported by research. Elliott et al. also found 
that men were more conformist than women. 
This study was well-controlled. All important extraneous variables 
• This study had a limited sample. The investigation only involved were monitored so that only the independent variable a.ected the ÿve people and they were friends of the researcher. dependent variable. 
You can drop that evaluation in almost anywhere and it will make sense. 

When you have mastered intermediate level, it is time to move on – but don’t do this until you have mastered the intermediate level. Don’t run before you can walk. 
There are many ways to explain your evaluation point: 
• 
You can use examples. 

• 
You can elaborate on what you have said already. 

• 
You can end by explaining why your point is a strength or limitation.


 ENDINGS 
Always ÿnish with a conclusion – this is not a summary, it is a judgement. It is useful to use phrases such as: This suggests ... This shows that ... This means ... Therefore ... Always end with a sentence beginning with T (of course it doesn’t have to 
be a T but that is a useful prompt, just start writing ‘This shows ...’). 
218 // A level and AS skills 

Evaluation questions mainly use these command words: 
Evaluate 
Some marked examples 











Discuss Question: Discuss one limitation of social learning theory. (2 marks) There are other command One limitation is that it used artiÿcial evidence. A lot of the studies words that also indicate were done in laboratories and are very artiÿcial. This means the theory evaluation, such as analyse, may not be relevant because people don’t behave like that. compare, justify, comment 
on.
Teacher comment: For 2 marks you would ÿrst be expected to identify 
the problem, which has been done here. For a further mark there should be additional information about the limitation, for example an explanation about why this is a limitation. There has been some attempt to do this (‘done in laboratories’) but it is very generic so not very e.ective. This is a very weak answer. 
Question: 






Brie.y evaluate the use of non-human animal studies in attachment research. (4 marks) 
Such studies are used because it would not be ethical to use humans and separate them from their parents, so this is a strength of such studies. 
On the other hand, it is diÿcult to generalise from research using animals, such as the studies by Lorenz where he demonstrated imprinting by arranging for some goslings to see him when they hatched. The research on imprinting led to attachment theory but maybe is not relevant. 
Teacher comment: If a question just asks for evaluation you can present strengths and/or limitations. There is no requirement for balance and no speciÿc number of evaluations is required – you could receive full marks for just one point of evaluation. The answer above covers two points of evaluation that are both relevant but not very e.ective – the descriptive content about Lorenz’s research is not an explanation of the evaluation point. In this way the answer has lost focus. The explanations are limited and no specialist terminology has been used. This answer would get some credit but is not very e.ective. 
AO3 Mark scheme 









The descriptors that may be used to mark a 4-mark AO3 question: 
Level  Marks  Description  
2  3–4  Evaluation is relevant, well-explained and focused, rather than generic criticism. The answer is generally coherent with effective use of specialist terminology. Evaluation is relevant although there is limited explanation and/or limited focus. Specialist terminology is not always used appropriately. Award one mark for answers consisting of a single point brie.y stated or muddled.  
1  1–2  
0  No relevant content.  

The mark scheme is presented here as an illustration of the AQA mark scheme. Always check the AQA website for the latest version of mark schemes as these may have been amended. 
Question: 






Evaluate the multi-store model of memory. (6 marks) 
Case studies have been used to show that there is a distinct di.erence between short- and long-term memory. For example, the study of HM who sustained damage to his hippocampus found that his long­term memory was still intact but he couldn’t form new short-term memories. This shows that the two kinds of memory have di.erent physical locations in the brain, supporting the multi-store model. 
One limitation of the multi-store model is that it is probably too simple. Subsequent research has shown that short-term memory has several sub-stores (e.g. visual and verbal stores as in the working memory model) and the same is true for long-term memory (e.g. episodic and procedural memory). This means that the multi-store model was quite restricted in what it told us about memory. 
Teacher comment: In an evaluation question worth 6 marks you probably need to present more than one evaluation. Two evaluations, well explained, could be enough. Three evaluations might be better but once you try to cover more than two evaluations you don’t have time to explain them suÿciently, which jeopardises your 
overall mark. The two evaluations covered here are both e.ective, well-explained, focused, organised and there is evidence of specialist terminology. This is altogether an impressive answer. 
AO3 Mark scheme 









The descriptors that may be used to mark a 6-mark AO3 question: 

The mark scheme is presented here as an illustration of the AQA mark scheme. Always check the AQA website for the latest version of mark schemes as these may have been amended. 

Essentially ‘e.ective’ means something that works, such as ‘an e.ective treatment for malaria’. 
An e.ective evaluation point is therefore one that works – it should not be generic. 

What is 



generic

? 
The word ‘generic’ means ‘general’. In the context of making evaluations it refers to that nice little list of all-purpose comments ‘This study lacked validity’, ‘This theory is culturally-biased’, etc. 
Such all-purpose evaluations can be scattered everywhere and require little understanding. Anyone can do that. 
Some generic evaluations can be quite lengthy. For example, ‘One problem with this research is that it is quite artiÿcial. It was conducted in a laboratory where things are not like they are in everyday life. This makes it diÿcult to generalise the ÿndings to everyday experience and makes the research worthless.’ 
Such a comment can be put in many essays with no attempt to make it speciÿcally relevant – and therefore it doesn’t count for much. 

What is 



explanation






? 

‘Explain’ means o.er some further information to help the reader understand what you are saying. This may include providing more relevant facts, o.ering an interpretation (‘This means that...’), justifying the point you are trying to make, and so on. 
Maybe think of the di.erence between someone asking you to tell them what you did last night and them asking you to explain what you did last night. Hmm. 

What is 



focus

? 

If you focus on an image, you concentrate your attention on that one thing. The same is required for good evaluation. You need to pay attention just to the study or theory you are evaluating rather than making general comments. 
One issue related to focus is that students o.en describe material (such as describing the procedures of a study) instead of explaining the evaluation point. They lose focus. 


Essay questions 
The ÿnal kind of question for us to examine is the essay question (AKA an extended • Brie.y outline and evaluate the Authoritarian Personality as an writing question when worth 12 or 16 marks) – where you are required to include explanation of obedience to authority.  (8 marks AS, 8 marks AL) both description (AO1) and evaluation (AO3) and sometimes also application (AO2). 
• Discuss one or more deÿnitions of abnormality.  
(8 marks AS, 8 marks AL) 
Examples of such questions are shown on the right. 
• Outline and evaluate two studies of social in.uence. 
Notice: 
(10 marks AS, 8 marks AL) 
• The command words vary. 
• Discuss what psychological research has told us about why people 
• The number of marks varies. Essay questions at AS level are a maximum of 12 
conform.  (12 marks AS, 16 marks AL) 
marks where AO1 and AO3 are likely to be equally divided. 
• Describe and evaluate explanations of forgetting. 
• Essay questions at A level are a maximum of 16 marks – on such questions the 
(12 marks AS, 16 marks AL) 
balance of marks is likely to be 6 marks for AO1 and 10 marks for AO3 except if 
• Discuss the contribution of Lorenz and Harlow to our understanding of 
there is application. 
attachment.  (12 marks AS, 16 marks AL) 
• One of the questions on the right includes some application material. 
• Maria and Sam were both abandoned at birth and spent the ÿrst 
• One question asks speciÿcally for studies, others concern theories/explanations 
few months of their lives in an institution. Sam was adopted by a 
and there is also one that just mentions research (so a theory or studies would 
loving family at the age of two months whereas Maria was not ÿnally 
be acceptable). 
adopted until she was just over one year of age. 
• Questions sometimes say ‘one or more’. This means that you could produce an 
Discuss the in.uence of early attachment on childhood and adult 
e.ective answer if you only discuss one study/theory but you can do more if 
relationships. Refer to the experiences of Maria and Sam as part of 
you wish. 
your discussion.  (12 marks AS, 16 marks AL) 
At the end of each chapter in this book are some student answers to practice questions, including answers for essay questions. 

Essays on research studies 
















In an AS question on research studies that is worth 12 marks, half of the marks are available for a description of the studies. If you try to describe too many studies you won’t have time to include details of the studies – and it is the details that show your understanding. Less is more – cover fewer studies but give lots of detail. Just one or two studies may be enough. It’s about quality rather than quantity. 

Essays with application material 



















Such questions include application in addition to the usual describe and evaluate elements of an essay question. 
You are required to make appropriate links between the theory and the scenario (stem) presented. If you do not do this you will not have fully answered the question. 

Some questions ask for two things. For example, ‘Outline and evaluate two deÿnitions of abnormality. (12 marks)’ 
In such an essay if you only describe and evaluate one deÿnition, this is called ‘partial performance’. You have only answered half of the question. 

What do students do wrong in essays? 





















• 
Students give too much description, not enough well-explained evaluation. 

• 
Students fail to make their evaluation e.ective – use the lead-in phrases on the le. to make it clear when you are presenting evaluation. 

• 
Students fail to answer the question – take time to plan your answer to focus on what will be creditworthy. If you just start writing your answer you may forget the focus of the question so it pays to do some planning. It may also help, as you start each new paragraph, to go back to the title to remind yourself what the essay should be about. 

• 
Students do not use paragraphs – which makes the essay very diÿcult to read. ‘Organisation’ is one of the criteria by which you are assessed so it will a.ect the overall impression of the essay. 



Student answer  Teacher comments  
OCD is seen to be mainly biological in origin and therefore drug treatments are an obvious solution. OCD has been linked to low serotonin and obsessive thoughts. Therefore SSRIs are used to treat OCD. SSRIs (they are called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) slow down the reuptake of serotonin at the synapse and calm people down. This calming down means that their thoughts and rituals become less frequent and they can lead a more normal life. A typical dose of the drug is 20 mg given as capsules or in liquid form which they take daily. The drugs often take 3–4 months before any effect is noticed which is something that may put people off. Then they stop taking the drugs and then they obviously don’t beneÿt from them. If people do keep on but still the SSRIs do not work there are other alternatives. First the dosage can be increased to 60 mg but that might lead to side effects. There is another drug Clomipramine that also affects the serotonin system but it has more side-effects and therefore is not the ÿrst line treatment. SNRIs are also used. These target another neurotransmitter, noradrenaline as well as serotonin. Research suggests that such drugs can be very effective. One study reviewed a number of other studies and found that SSRIs performed better than placebos in about 70% of cases. SSRIs were most effective when combined with psychological therapies such as CBT. However, recently researchers have drawn attention to the fact that some of the drug evidence may be unreliable. It is mainly funded by drug companies who may be biased about what evidence they publish as they make a lot of money from drugs. Some people and doctors prefer drug therapy to psychological therapy because it is cost effective and easy. From the individual’s perspective very little effort is required. From the doctor’s perspective giving drugs is cheaper than psychological therapies. One considerable problem is that drugs have side-effects though these tend to be minimal for SSRIs. Typical side-effects are indigestion, blurred vision and reduced sex drive. If they do occur, they may be temporary but it could be enough to put someone off taking the drugs. There are many other issues with drug treatments but overall people like them because they require no effort and they often appear to be doing some good, though that could be a placebo effect. They generally don’t have bad effects. 404 words  On the positive side this essay is well-organised. The student has put all the descriptive material .rst followed by all the evaluation. This would help a reader to identify these components of the essay. The paragraphs make the essay easy to read, which contributes to the organisation of the essay. The descriptive content has used specialist terminology and is accurate and well-detailed in places but this is not always true. For example, the action of SSRIs has not been explained. Four evaluative points are discussed, none of which are thorough. The effectiveness is spoiled by the lack of precision, for example the study on effectiveness has not been cited. In the evaluation section of the essay specialist terms have not been used, the study on effectiveness was a meta-analysis so that term might have been included. The account of drug companies conducting biased research is rather super.cial (lacks focus). The .nal paragraph repeats what has already been said so adds nothing to the answer. Altogether the evaluation is mostly effective but not thorough. The student’s .nal attainment is calculated by working out the best .t for all these different assessments to see what level best describes the answer. The actual mark will be determined by whether one is drawn to the level above or below. For an A level essay more rigour and evaluation is expected and therefore, for that standard, this essay would be assessed less well than as an AS response.  


You can use the mark scheme below to mark  Note, in an application essay the marks are distributed  
extended writing questions:  di.erently and the mark scheme includes criteria related  
12-mark essay (6 marks AO1 and 6 marks AO3).  to application:  
16-mark essay (6 marks AO1 and 10 marks AO3).  12-mark essay (6 marks AO1, 2 marks AO2, 4 marks AO3).  
16-mark essay (6 marks AO1, 4 marks AO2, 6 marks AO3).  

Level  Marks for AS level  Marks for A level  Description  
4  10–12  13–16  Knowledge is accurate and generally well-detailed. Evaluation/discussion is thorough and effective. Minor detail and/or expansion of argument is sometimes lacking. The answer is clear, coherent and focused. Specialist terminology is used effectively. Knowledge is evident. There are occasional inaccuracies/omissions. Evaluation/discussion is mostly effective. The answer is mostly clear and organised but occasionally lacks focus. Specialist terminology is mostly used effectively. Limited knowledge is present. Focus is mainly on description. Any evaluation/discussion is of limited effectiveness. The answer lacks clarity, accuracy, organisation and focus in places. Specialist terminology is used inappropriately on occasions. Knowledge is very limited. Evaluation/discussion is limited, poorly focused or absent. The answer as a whole lacks clarity, has many inaccuracies and is poorly organised. Specialist terminology is either absent or inappropriately used.  
3  7–9  9–12  
2  4–6  5–8  
1  1–3  1–4  
0  0  No relevant content.  


To decide on a mark identify the level that best describes the essay, and then consider whether you are more tempted by the level above or below to determine the exact mark to award. Always check the AQA website for the latest version of mark schemes as these may have been amended. 



Writing frame for an essay 




















There are probably two big challenges 
ahead for you: 
1. 
Writing essays. 

2. 
Learning all the material in this book. The suggestions on this spread are 


informed by psychological research – a.er all, we are psychologists. 
AO1 Key point  Description  
Locus of control (LOC)  Rotter suggested people have a sense of what controls their behaviour.  
Internals  Some people believe that the things that happen to them are largely controlled by themselves. For example, if you do well in an exam it is because you worked hard.  
Externals  Other people believe that things happen without their control. If they did well in an exam they might say it was good luck or the textbook. If they fail it was bad luck or the questions were hard.  
Continuum  There is a continuum with high internal LOC at one end and high external LOC at the other end of the continuum, with low internal and low external lying in-between.  
Explanation 1  People who have an internal LOC are more likely to be able to resist pressures to conform or obey.  
Explanation 2  People with a high internal LOC tend to be more self-con.dent, more achievement-oriented, have higher intelligence and have less need for social approval.  




222 // A level and AS skills 
The psychology behind writing frames is called sca°olding. Psychologists use this term to describe the process where a person needs support in the early stages of learning to do something new. 
The idea is that, when you are ready, you kick away the sca°old, and – hey presto – you can do it on your own. 
Not a good idea if you are standing on 
Now do the same for the evaluation (AO3). To plan your evaluation the organisation of the writing frame is a bit di.erent. On page 218 we explained that good evaluation points start with the basics, and then you may add further elaboration (intermediate and higher level). The table below will help you plan this. 
AO3 Key point  Intermediate level evaluation  Higher level evaluation  
There is research support for the link between LOC and resistance to obedience.  Holland measured levels of LOC in a repeat of Milgram’s study. 37% of internals did not continue whereas only 23% of externals did not continue.  So internals showed a greater level of resistance than externals.  
There is counter-evidence, challenging the link.  Twenge et al. analysed 40 years of research from the 1960s and found people were more resistant to being obedient.  But they also found people were more external. If resistance is linked to an internal locus of control, we would expect people to have become more internal.  

Applying Psychology to successful studying 
Some AS students and A level students may consider some further evaluation points, and even o.er a discussion. 
LOC may be less important than Rotter suggested.  Many studies (e.g. Holland) show that internal LOC is linked to being  However Rotter pointed out that the situation may be more important because  
able to resist social in.uence.  LOC only seems important in new situations. Otherwise you just do what you did before, regardless of your LOC.  

Some essays also involve some application (AO2), for example: 
Mavis didn’t do so well in her exams. She blames her teacher, she blames the textbook, and she blames the fact that none of her friends worked. In fact she blames everything but herself. 
Describe and evaluate research relating to the role of locus of control in resisting social in.uence. Refer to Mavis in your answer. (12 marks AS, 16 marks AL) 
If you are answering an essay like this you must remember to make links to the context. 
Remember: 

– a cue is a thing that serves as reminder of 
something else. An actor knows she must come in 
We have divided this book into spreads. Each spread represents one chunk of the 
speciÿcation as indicated at the top le. of each spread. For each topic you should 
produce a revision card. 
on cue – a reminder or signal. 
For some spreads you might decide to have two revision cards. 
The big secret is that you should do this NOW. Revision is meant to be re-vision – seeing it again. 
When you study a topic, prepare a card like the one below. It will help you understand the spread. 
But the joy is that you will have a set of revision cards all ready for the end of year exams. 



Psychologists have investigated the value of cues in remembering. They act as a reminder of what else you know. 
The revision card on the left has cue words. Cover the text in the middle column and see if the cue word can help you remember what is there. 
If you can’t remember anything, then look at the middle column. If you need further prompting look at the writing frame on the facing page. 
Tomorrow repeat the same sequences and see if you can remember more. And so on. Eventually all you need to remember are the cue words and the rest will pop into your mind. 
Psychological research shows that people often have much more in their heads than they can recall – they just need the right cue (see page 56). 

Optional 

 Applying Psychology to successful studying // 223 
There are two spaces for each evaluation point in order to record  the levels of elaboration. 

Mnemonics 






Here is a ÿnal bit of psychology – we psychologists know what techniques work! And the main answer is … processing. The more you play around with and discuss the ideas, the better you will remember them. Just making the revision card will give you an opportunity to process the new ideas. 
Here are two further thoughts: 

Method of loci 








This is a method used by stage performers who wow audiences with memory feats. Say, for example, the performer is trying to memorise the names of every member of the audience. He mentally walks around his house (or down a street) and places each name somewhere, forming a link between the name and place – for example he puts ‘Mary’ in a bowl of berries (Mary Berry, the cookery expert). Later, when trying to recall names he just takes a mental walk and ÿnds the items where he le. them. Try it out – it really works for things you are ÿnding diÿcult to remember. 

Test your recall 









Most students revise by reading things over and over (maintenance rehearsal in the lingo of psychologists). But this doesn’t work that well. What works much better is to read something, then close your book, and write down everything you can remember. The act of trying to recall the information strengthens the memory trace. 
’ 
’ 
‘’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
 References // 225 
Feldman, R. (2012). Parent-infant synchrony: a viobehavioural model of mutual influences in the formation of affiliative bonds. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 75, 125–142. . page 75 
Feldman, R. and Eidelman, A.I. (2007). Maternal postpartum behavior and the emergence of infant–mother and infant–father synchrony in preterm and full-term infants: The role of neonatal vagal tone. Developmental Psychobiology, 49, 290–302. . page 74 
Field, T. (1978). Interaction behaviors of primary versus secondary caretaker fathers. Developmental Psychology, 14, 183–184. . page 78 
Finegood, E. D., Blair, C., Granger, D. A., Hibel, 
L. C., Mills-Koonce, R., & Family Life Project Key Investigators (2016). Psychobiological influences on maternal sensitivity in the context of adversity. Developmental Psychology, 52(7), 1073–1087. . page 74 
Gao, Y., Raine, A., Chan, F. and Venables, P. 
H. (2010). Early maternal and paternal bonding, childhood physical abuse and adult psychopathic personality. Psychological Medicine 40(6), pp. 1007–1016. . page 91 
Goldfarb, W. (1943) The effects of early institutional care on adolescent personality. Journal of Experimental Education, 12(2), 106–129. . page 91 
Goldfarb, W. (1947). Variations in adolescent adjustment of institutionally-reared children. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 17(3), 
449. . page 90 
Goldfarb, W. (1955). Emotional and intellectual consequences of psychologic deprivation in infancy: a re-evaluation. In P. Hoch and J. Zubin (Eds) Psychopathology of childhood. New York: Grune and Stratton. . page 91 
Grossmann, K., Grossmann, K. E., Fremmer-Bombik, E., Kindler, H., Scheuerer-Englisch, 
H. and Zimmermann, A. P. (2002). The uniqueness of the child–father attachment relationship: Fathers’ sensitive and challenging play as a pivotal variable in a 16­year longitudinal study. Social development, 11(3), 301–337. . page 78 
Grossmann, K. E., Grossmann, K., Huber, F. and Wartner, U. (1981). German children’s behavior towards their mothers at 12 months and their fathers at 18 months in Ainsworth’s Strange Situation. International Journal of Behavioral Development, 4(2), 157–181. . page 89 
Harlow, H. (1958). The nature of love. American Psychologist, 13, 673–685. . page 80 
Hay, D.F. and Vespo, J.E. (1988). Social learning perspectives on the development of the mother-child relationship. In Burns, B. and Hay, D.F. (Eds). The Different Faces on Motherhood. New York: Springer. . page 83 
Hazan, C. and Shaver, P.R. (1987). Romantic love conceptualised as an attachment process. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 511–524. . pages 94, 97 
Howe, D. (1998) Patterns of adoption: nature, nurture and psychosocial development. Oxford, Blackwell. . page 81 
Isabella, R.A., Belsky, J. and von Eye, A. (1989). Origins of infant-mother attachment: An examination of interactional synchrony during the infant’s first year. Developmental Psychology, 25, 12–21. . pages 74, 75, 78, 83 Jin, M.K., Jacobvitz, D., Hazen, N. and Jung, 
S.H. (2012). Maternal sensitivity and infant attachment security in Korea: Cross-cultural validation of the Strange Situation. Attachment and Human Development, 14, 33–44. . page 88 
Kagan, J. (1982). The construct of difficult temperament: a reply to Thomas, Chess and Korn. Merrill-Palmer Quarterly, 28, 21–24. . page 87 
Kagan, J., Reznick, J. S., and Snidman, N. (1986). Temperamental inhibition in early childhood. The study of temperament: Changes, continuities and challenges. Hove: Psychology Press, 53–67. . page 87 
Kennedy, M., Kreppner, J., Knights, N., Kumsta, R., Maughan, B., Golm, D., … & Sonuga-Barke, E. J. (2016). Early severe institutional deprivation is associated with a persistent variant of adult attention­deficit/hyperactivity disorder: clinical presentation, developmental continuities and life circumstances in the English and Romanian Adoptees study. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 57(10), 1113–1125. . page 92 
Kerns, K.A. (1994). A longitudinal examination of links between mother-infant attachment and children’s friendships. Journal of Personality and Social Relationships, 11, 379–381. . page 94 
Kokkinos, C. M. (2007). Elementary school children’s involvement in bullying and victimisation: the role of attachment style and internalising and externalising symptomatology. Scientia Paedigogia Experimentalis, XLIV, 49–60. . page 87 
Koluchová, J. (1976). The further development of twins after severe and prolonged deprivation: a second report. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 17, 181–188. . page 91 
Kornienko, D. S. (2016). Child temperament and mother’s personality as predictors of maternal relation to child. Procedia 
– Social and Behavioral Sciences, 233, 343–347. . page 85 
Langton, E.G. (2006). Romania’s children. The Psychologist, 19, 412–413. . page 93 
Lévy, F., Melo, A. I., Galef, B. G., Madden, M. and Fleming, A. S. (2003). Complete maternal deprivation affects social, but not spatial, learning in adult rats. Developmental Psychobiology, 43(3), 177–191 . page 91 
Lewis, H. (1954). Deprived children: the Mersham experiment, a social and clinical study. London: Oxford University Press. . page 91 
Lorenz, K. (1952). King Solomon’s ring. London: Methuen. . page 80 
Main, M. and Solomon, J. (1986). Discovery of a disorganised disoriented attachment pattern. In Affective development in infancy. Norwood: Ablex. . page 87 
McCallum, F. and Golombok, S. (2004). Children raised in fatherless families from infancy: a follow-up of children of lesbian and single heterosexual mothers at early adolescence. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 45, 1407–1419. . page 79 
McCarthy, G. (1999). Attachment style and adult love relationships and friendships: a study of a group of women at risk of experiencing relationship difficulties. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 72, 305–321. . page 94 McCormick, M. P., O’Connor, E. E. and Barnes, 
S. P. (2016). Mother–child attachment styles and math and reading skills in middle childhood: The mediating role of children’s exploration and engagement. Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 36, 295–306. . page 87 
Meltzoff, A.N. and Moore, M.K. (1977). Imitation of facial and manual gestures by human neonates. Science, 198, 75–78. . page 74 
Morelli, G. A. and Tronick, E. Z. (1991). Efe multiple caretaking and attachment. In J. L. Gewirtz, W. M. Kurtines and J. L. Lamb (Eds) Intersections with attachment, pp. 41–51. Hove, Sussex: Psychology Press. . page 89 
Myron-Wilson, P. and Smith, P.K. (1998). Attachment relationships and influences on bullying. Proceedings of the British Psychological Society, 6(2), 89–90. . page 94 
Regolin, L. and Vallortigara, G. (1995). Perception of partly occluded objects by young chicks. Perception & Psychophysics, 57(7), 971–976 . page 81 
Rutter, M. (1981). Maternal deprivation reassessed. 2nd edition. Penguin: Harmondsworth. . page 91 
Rutter, M. (2006). Attachment from infancy to adulthood. The major longitudinal studies. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 47, 974–977. . page 92 
Rutter, M., Sonuga-Barke, E.J., Beckett, C., Castle, J., Kreppner, J., Kumsta, R., Bell, C.A. (2011) Deprivation-specific psychological patterns: Effects of institutional deprivation. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development. 75(1), 1–250. . page 92 
Schaffer, H.R. and Emerson, P. (1964). The development of social attachments in infancy. Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development, 29, 1–77. . pages 76, 77 
Sears, R. R., Maccoby, E.E. and Levin, H. (1957). Patterns of child-rearing. Evanston, Ill: Peters and Row. . page 82 
Seebach, P. (2005). Baby duck syndrome: Imprinting on your system makes change a very hard thing. IBM Developerworks. . page 81 
Simonelli, A., de Palo, F., Moretti, M. Baratter, 
P.M. and Porreca, A. (2014). The strange situation procedure: The role of the attachment patterns in the Italian culture. American Journal of Applied Psychology, 3, 47–56. . page 88 
Takahashi, K. (1986). Examining the strange-situation procedure with Japanese mothers and 12-month-old infants. Developmental Psychology, 22(2), 265–270. . pages 87, 89 
Takahashi, K. (1990). Affective relationships and their lifelong development. In Baltes, P.B. (ed) Lifespan development and behaviour vol 
10. Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum. . page 87 
van IJzendoorn, M.H. (1993). Multiple caregiving among African Americans and infant attachment: The need for an emic approach. Commentary. Human Development, 36, 103–105. . page 77 
van IJzendoorn, M.H. (1995). Adult attachment representations, parental responsiveness, and infant attachment: a meta-analysis on the predictive validity of the Adult Attachment Interview. Psychological Bulletin, 117(3), 387. . page 84 
van IJzendoorn, M.H., and Kroonenberg, P.M. (1988) Cross-cultural patterns of attachment: A meta-analysis of the Strange Situation. Child Development, 59, 147–156. . page 88 Vincent, J. (2006). Emotional attachment and mobile phones. Knowledge, Technology and Policy, 19, 39–44. . page 97 
Ward, M.J., Lee, S.S. and Polan, J. (2006). Attachment and psychopathology in a community sample. Attachment and Human Development, 8, 327–340. . page 87 
Zeanah, C.H., Smyke, A.T., Koga, S.F. and Carlson, E. (2005). Attachment in institutionalised and community children in Romania. Child Development, 76, 1015–1028. . page 92 
Chapter 4 







Bandura, A. (1977). Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioural change. Psychological Review, 84, 191–215. . page 111 
Bandura, A. and Walters, R.H. (1963). Social Learning and Personality Development. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. . page 110 
Bandura, A., Ross, D. and Ross, S. (1961). Transmission of aggression through imitation of aggressive role models. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 63, 575–582. . page 110 
Braver, T. S., Cohen, J. D., Nystrom, L. E., Jonides, J., Smith, E. E. and Noll, D. C. (1997). A parametric study of prefrontal cortex involvement in human working memory. Neuroimage, 5, 49–62. . page 112 
Bugelski, B.R. and Alampay, D.A. (1962). The role of frequency in developing perceptual sets. Canadian Journal of Psychology, 15, 205–211. . page 113 
Cipriani, A., Furukawa, T. A., Salanti, G., Chaimani, A., Atkinson, L. Z. …and Geddes, 
J. R. (2018). Comparative efficacy and acceptability of 21 antidepressant drugs for the acute treatment of adults with major depressive disorder: a systematic review and network meta-analysis. The Lancet, 391(10128), 1357–1366. . page 115 
Cumberbatch, G., Wood, G. and Littlejohns, V. (2001). Television: The Public’s view 2000. London: ITC. . page 111 
Freud, S. (1909/1977) Analysis of a phobia in a five year old boy (Little Hans) The Pelcian Freud Library, Volume 8, Hammondsworth: Penguin. . pages 106, 120, 121, 123 
Pavlov, I. P. (1927). Conditioned Reflexes. London: Oxford University Press. . page 108 
Skinner, B.F. (1953). Science and Human Behaviour. New York: MacMillan. . pages 108, 109 
Stein, C.J. and Test, M.A. (1980). Alternative to mental hospital treatment program and clinical evaluation. Archives of General Psychology, 37, 392–397. . page 125 
Watson, J.B. (1913). Psychology as the Behaviourist views it. Psychological Review, 20, 158–177. . pages 106, 108 
Wong, D. (2008). Five creepy ways video games are trying to get you addicted: http:// www.cracked.com/article_18461_5­
creepy-ways-video-games-are-trying­
to-get-you-addicted.html [Accessed July 2014] . page 109 
’ 
 References // 227 
‘’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
‘’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
‘ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
 Index/Glossary // 229 
‘ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ ’ 
’ 
 Index/Glossary // 231 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
 Index/Glossary // 233 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
‘’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
‘ 
’ 
 Index/Glossary // 235 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ ’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
‘ 
’ 
’ 
‘’ 
 Index/Glossary // 237 
’ 
’ 
’ 
’ 
 Acknowledgements // 239 
The back page 

and organises student conferences. In a previous life she was a teacher probably for more years than you have been alive. Her spare time (what there is of it) involves her husband and children (now over 20 years old), pubs and mountains, preferably on the same day. 
The authors would like to thank our fantastic support team at Illuminate Publishing – first and foremost Rick Jackman who managed the superhuman task of bringing this project to fruition 
and with good humour! We would also like to thank the rest of the team at Illuminate – Peter Burton, Clare Jackman, Saskia Burton and Adrian Moss. The second enormous thanks goes to the world’s most fabulous editor Nic Watson, aided by the supremely efficient team of Sarah Clifford and Stephanie White who set out the text and illustrations with great care and inventiveness, guided by the book design guru Nigel Harriss. In addition the book has benefitted from the watchful eye of Dr Tracey Elder who took a lot of time and great care to check and refine our advice. 
Finally the authors and publisher also wish to thank the following teachers and their students for their invaluable suggestions: Veena Bhandal, Tom Buxton-Cope, Anthony Curtis, Sara Dryburgh, Deb Gajic, Jo Haycock, Mark Jones, Ruth Jones, Zoe Johnson, Jane McGee, Andy Rayner, Claudia Stevens, Dan Vernon, Faye Whiteley. 
Matt is a Chartered Psychologist and Associate Fellow of the British Psychological Society. He taught psychology for 25 years and is currently Rob was an A level teacher for more than 20 years and Learning Technology and Innovation Manager would like to give a big shout out to his ex-colleagues for a Social Justice and Education charity. Matt at Winstanley College in Wigan. In his spare moments, is also an editor of Psychology Review. When he likes nothing more than to pluck away tunelessly not working or writing, Matt DJs and loves live at his guitar, ideally in the Lake District. He plans to music and festivals. 
ask Matt how you become a Chartered Psychologist. In an eerie echo of the first edition of this book, he still hasn’t seen Frozen 2. 







